 “13 Tzameti” flaunts a grim sense of the absurd that suggests a French new wave film infected with a virulent strain of Eastern European nihilism. The most pronounced Gallic flavor in the film, a handsome black-and-white thriller, in which Gela Babluani, a Georgian filmmaker, makes his flashy directorial debut, is the French language. With its icy cynicism and desolate settings, the film evokes the work of the young Roman Polanski in his sadistic trickster mode.  The movie’s protagonist, Sebastien (Georges Babluani, the director’s brother), is a wiry, 20-year-old Georgian immigrant living from hand to mouth in a rural French town filmed to suggest crumbling Eastern European ruin. While repairing a neighbor’s roof, he overhears an enigmatic conversation in which his suave, white-haired employer, Jean-François (Philippe Passon), alludes to a job that may lead to easy money.  When Jean-François dies of a morphine overdose, Sebastien is brusquely informed that his services are no longer needed, and that he won’t be paid for his work. Stealing a letter to Jean-François with information about the high-paying job, Sebastien follows its cryptic instructions to pick up a first-class train ticket and get off at a certain stop. From the moment he boards the train, the police begin keeping an eye on him. Met at a crossroads, Sebastien is whisked to a remote chateau in the woods, surrounded by shiny black limousines.  Up to this halfway point, “13 Tzameti” steadily intensifies a mood of Kafkaesque foreboding. Its air of life-or-death secrecy recalls “Eyes Wide Shut,” in which Tom Cruise infiltrates a club of orgiasts. But “13 Tzameti” is not about sex. If you don’t want any of its secrets unlocked, stop reading here.  Escorted into the mansion, Sebastien finds himself a prisoner obliged to participate in a deadly game in which the chances of his surviving are slim. He is in the clubhouse of a secret society of high-stakes gamblers who bet on an elaborate variation of Russian roulette, in which numbered players stand in a circle with loaded guns pointed at their neighbors’ heads and shoot on command. Sebastien has the unlucky number 13.  (“Tzameti” means 13 in Georgian.)  Over successive rounds, each player is given one, then two, three and four bullets. As a referee (Pascal Bongard) barks instructions like a feral prison guard, the players spin their cartridges, wait for a striped lightbulb to flash, then fire. The survivor is the winner of a climactic duel in which the last two players face each other eye to eye, gun to forehead, and simultaneously pull the trigger. The winner collects a suitcase full of money. His ultimate challenge is to escape the premises without interception by the police, or worse.  As the bodies topple, there is a remarkable lack of bloodshed onscreen. Realistic gore would only distract from the tension and undermine the league-of-depraved-gentlemen elegance surrounding the proceedings. A kink in the rules allows players, when overcome with terror, to be injected with morphine.  If the game is a quintessentially Polanskian exercise in macho diabolism, it has little of the anguished emotional resonance of the Russian roulette played in “The Deer Hunter.” The games are closer in feel to the kind of fiendish practical jokes played in the “Saw” horror movies. Addressing the atavistic side of the male psyche, which gravitates toward cockfights and extreme sports, “13 Tzameti” dares you to be shocked.  Observing the contained excitement of the assembled high-rollers, an image flashed through my mind of the jowly Adolphe Menjou in “Paths of Glory,” playing a cynical French general who blithely dispatches young men to certain slaughter in World War I. For such men, blood lust keeps the juices flowing, and the notion that human life is worth anything more than the resale value of severed body parts is just so much foolish sentimentality.

Shot like the grunge version of a '50s noir thriller from France (or Soviet Georgia), the black-and-white "13 (Tzameti)" turns into a shocker of Tarantino proportions in protracted sequences of explosive violence that leave viewers quaking. The difference is that there is nothing tongue in cheek about the surreal physical and psychological violence here, which is about as pleasurable to watch as a dog fight. Still the forceful images linger in the memory, making it likely that whatever pic's small commercial fortune on Euro art screens, talented first-time helmer Gela Babluani will be heard from again. 
Sebastien (George Babluani), a clean-faced 20-year-old who lives in dire straits with his immigrant family, is hired to repair the roof of the morphine-addicted Godon (Philippe Passon). The old man dies before Sebastien can be paid, but not before the boy overhears a conversation that seems to promise easy money. He impulsively decides he will follow the instructions meant for Godon and see where they lead him.
It's a promising premise and well-accompanied by an atmosphere of threatening mystery. Once Sebastien steps on a train with his filched first-class ticket, events start moving quickly. Unbeknown to him, the police are following his every move -- but why? 
Sabine Bauchart's screenplay keeps viewers guessing a little too long as he scrambles from clue to clue. Then, just when it seems the story is dissolving into a wild goose chase, Sebastien comes face to face with a ring of clandestine gamblers who bet on human lives. 
Second half of film is a tour-de-force exercise in horror. Arriving at a secluded house in the woods, Sebastien suddenly finds himself Player No. 13 in a terrible game. Although the tale has the quality of a nightmare, actors play it straight with faces filled with human degradation and despair. Trapped in a situation he can do nothing about, Sebastien loses his innocence before the first round is over. 
Though not as intense as some of the other thesps, young Babluani is easy to identify with, involving the audience in the mounting horror of his situation. Among the other "players" in the diabolical game, Aurelien Recoing is a live-wire standout, while Pascal Bongard is unforgettable as the screaming referee and master of ceremonies. 
The director -- son of well-known Georgian helmer Temur Babluani -- has absorbed a lot from classic East European cinema, including a feeling for eerie faces and images, and a knack for building tension. He is fortunate to apply his gifts to Sabine Bauchart's quite original screenplay, which might be a candidate for a remake.
Tariel Meliava's B&W cinematography has a stark brutality that brings the old Georgian cinema to mind, as do the faces of just about every member of the cast. A score by East (Troublemakers) pumps up the tension, making it useless to close your eyes.
For the record, "Tzameti" means 13 in Georgian.
Camera (B&W), Tariel Meliava; editor, Noemie Moreau; music, East (Troublemakers); art director, Bernard Peault; sound (Dolby Digital), Ludovic Elias. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (Venice Days), Sept. 3, 2005. Running time: 93 MIN.

 

With:
 Vania Villers, Fred Ulysse, Augustin Legrand, Joe Prestia, Christophe Vandevelde.
(French dialogue)

 


The artiest entry in the ever growing torture-movie genre, this playfully wicked French thriller from twentysomething provocateur Gela Babluani blasts its way into your brainpan with the help of black-and-white widescreen cinematography whose striking but smooth textures better suit the upwardly mobile auteur than his poor protagonist. Patching roofs in rural France to support his impoverished Georgian immigrant clan, Sébastian (the filmmaker's boyishly handsome little brother Georges) gets screwed out of a paycheck, then impulsively assumes another man's identity in pursuit of untold opportunity from a train ticket and mysterious instructions that the wind literally blows his way. Narrative contrivance abounds well past the point when the kid learns that Fate has tapped him to play a most dangerous game, though Babluani's own sport-shooting advances one's heart rate enough to push logic aside. As a brutal metaphor for the global economy, 13 Tzameti  takes care of business; its assertion that desperate means require desperate measures naturally extends to the hair-trigger world of genre filmmaking, wherein young Babluani did what he had to do.
