iven the number of films that have featured astonishing performances from real-life street children - the Brazilian films "Pixote" and "City of God" spring to mind, as well as Mira Nair's "Salaam Bombay!" or Truffaut's "400 Blows" - the law of averages demands that every once in a while a movie must come along starring young nonprofessional actors who aren't very good. That's unfortunately the case in "15," a Singaporean film about the desultory adventures of a gang of disaffected youth. The film, which opens today at the Anthology Film Archives in the East Village, is a loosely connected series of vignettes that follow five young residents of a public housing project as they smuggle drugs, ponder suicide and smoke tragically in slow motion while a single rose petal wafts by in the wind. "15" is the first feature film of Royston Tan, 28, who got his start making music videos - a pedigree evident in the film's use of quick cuts, flashy intertitles and video-game-like animated sequences. '15' Directed by Royston TanIn Hokkien and Mandarin, with English subtitlesUnrated, 90 minutes  

"15" is Asian Kid Rebels 101. So predictable it could almost be a parody of the genre -- though that would require a sense of humor above and beyond the self-reflexive comedy on display here -- film follows five disaffected teens bumming around in the gritty underbelly of, uh, Singapore. First feature by young shortsmaker Royston Tan is pure fest fare and will appeal to like-minded auds with the leisure to celebrate designer "rebellion."
Collage-style pic, full of on-screen graphics (in Chinese) and the whole manual of film school trickery, follows the fatuous five (purportedly played by real street kids) as they complain about not being understood by their parents and turn to what passes in Singapore for anti-social acts. This involves lounging around smoking joints, popping pills, singing nonsense rap songs, dreaming in cliches about their future and playing at homoeroticism. When one of them says he wants to commit suicide and let all of Singapore know about it, he can't even find a suitable building to jump off. Yup, it's that kind of film. Tech credits are fine within the prescribed limits.
Camera (color), Lim Ching-leong; editors, Jeff Stevens, Nigel Fernandez, Darlene Lim, Azhar Ismon; music, Yellow Box; art director, Daniel Lim. Reviewed on videocassette, Montreal, Sept. 3, 2003. (In Montreal World Film Festival -- Cinema of Asia; also in Venice Film Festival -- Critics' Week.) Original Mandarin title: Shiwu
. Mandarin, Singlish dialogue. Running time: 80 MIN.
 

With:
 Shaun Tan, Melvin Chen, Vynn Soh, Erick Chun, Melvin Lee.
 


Once a specialty of mainland Chinese and Taiwanese cinema, the alienated Asian youth subgenre inevitably finds its way to Singapore , where the merging of capitalistic ultra-modernity and draconian social order would seem to provide fertile ground for adolescent rebellion. Royston Tan's over-the-top 15  follows a gang of high school boys as they engage in drug abuse, physical violence, and just about everything else bored kids do to pass the time. Filmed in MTV -style chop-and-shock, 15 seeks to imitate the media-saturated minds of its idle protagonists, all of whom are non-actors playing versions of themselves. The collision of neorealist casting with in-your-face visual pyrotechnics is jarring to say the least, and 15  quickly wears down the viewer with its barrage of strobe effects and attention-deficit editing. Tan based the film on his award-winning short of the same name, and indeed, 15  feels distended (even at only 90 minutes). The directionless lives on display all too easily translate into a directionless film, leaving the discerning viewer to pine for the works of Jia Zhangke  as well as that masterpiece of Asian youth-gone-wrong, Edward Yang 's A Brighter Summer Day .
