I'll leave it to greater metaphysicians than I to divine why backward storytelling has come into vogue, but its appeal is no mystery: To unfold a relationship in reverse chronology is to mirror how our memory works. François Ozon's 5X2  opens with an attractive 40ish couple (Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi and Stéphane Freiss) signing divorce papers, then heading off to a hotel room for a goodbye shag that turns ugly. The film then proceeds to move, in reverse order, through four more episodes: dinner party, childbirth, wedding night, first spark of love. Ozon stages each scene so assuredly, with such a fluid sense of motive and desire, that I assumed we'd witness how even the best of intentions, from each party, could strand a marriage on the rocks. But no. The story 5X2  tells is this: The wife is vibrant, the husband a shifty cold fish. Feminist sanctimony, it turns out, looks much the same forward and backward.

 The 2 in François Ozon's "5x2" are Marion (Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi) and Gilles (Stéphane Freiss), a French couple whose unhappy marriage is chronicled backward through five episodes, starting with their divorce and ending with their first encounter at an Italian seaside resort.  The relationship, as glimpsed in these partial, pointed vignettes, is a chronicle of failed connections and miscommunication (with reference to relevant articles from the matrimonial sections of the French Civil Code). These two never seem to want the same thing at the right time. They have sex, unhappily, after their divorce papers are signed, but not after their wedding vows have been exchanged - at least not with each other - and their desires, erotic and otherwise, seem, from finish to start, always to be at cross-purposes.  Mr. Ozon, whose recent films include "Swimming Pool," "8 Femmes" and "Under the Sand," has an evident fondness for combining earnest melodrama with self-conscious gimmickry. After "Memento" and "Irréversible," reverse chronology is not exactly a novelty, but it does make some dramatic sense in this case.  Told in the usual sequence, the story of Gilles and Marion would be a banal bell curve of infatuation, bliss, boredom, regret and recrimination. As it is, "5x2" does not quite make the case that Gilles and Marion are entirely worth our interest, let alone our sympathy, but the reversal of narrative order gives their ordinary moments together a faint aura of mystery, as Mr. Ozon teases us with the conceit that it will all make sense in the end - or rather, the beginning.  Of course, love is not a puzzle that can easily be solved, and the real ingenuity of "5x2" lies in Mr. Ozon's mastery of emotional shorthand. He tells us very little about the characters and seems to have encouraged Ms. Bruni-Tedeschi and Mr. Freiss not to be too obvious or revealing. In their private moments as well as when there are other people around, Gilles and Marion display both easy married-couple intimacy and the guarded, tentative manner of people who do not quite trust each other. (Not, as it turns out, that they should.) Their furtive glances and hesitations are the sand in the gears of their shared life, which seems to have ended by wearing down gradually.  Or so we assume. Gilles and Marion may not know each other very well, but we hardly know them at all. We witness, in 90 minutes, a handful of discontinuous scenes.  First there is the somber ceremony at a magistrate's office (and that unpleasant encounter in a hotel room afterward), followed (or preceded, some months or years earlier) by a casual dinner with Gilles's gay brother during which the topic of fidelity is uncomfortably broached. Then Marion goes into labor, while Gilles finds himself unable to attend the birth of his son (or to bear the company of his in-laws). Then the wedding night, enlivened by the improbable emergence of a studly American out of the forest in the middle of the night, and finally the first meeting, when Marion and Gilles, vague acquaintances from work, cross paths in Italy, where Gilles has come with his longtime  (soon-to-be-ex-) girlfriend, Valérie (Géraldine Pailhas).  How and why Marion and Gilles travel from one point to another remain enigmas, which may be the only thing that saves them from being crushingly ordinary. Mr. Ozon views their behavior with detachment that occasionally warms toward compassion, though more for Marion than for her husband.  Mr. Freiss has a sharp, slightly vulpine face, which grows more clean-shaven as the movie progresses, even as Gilles's essential egoism, barbed with a hint of sadistic coldness, remains constant. Ms. Bruno-Tedeschi's features are more expressive, and by the end it becomes clear that Marion's fatigue in the early scenes is really deep disappointment. But her passivity also frustrates the development of any real sympathy, and when "5x2" is over, it feels more like a story you've heard about distant acquaintances than like something you've witnessed or lived through.  Whatever happened to Gilles and Marion? They split up? Oh, that's too bad. Let's go see a movie.  "5x2" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has several sex scenes.

A relatively sober, deftly told tale of coupledom for grown-ups, "5x2" starts on the day a divorce is pronounced and works its way backward, alighting on important moments in the relationship. Excellent perfs and writer-director Francois Ozon's sure, unfussy way with the camera add up to a viewing experience whose richness depends in large part on how much the viewer reads into the human templates on display. Pre-sold in many territories on the strength of Ozon's reputation, pic, which competes in Venice the day after its Sept. 1 opening in France, should perform reasonably well in Gaul and beyond. 
Pic is authoritatively wrenching from the first frame as the details of the divorce decree separating Marion (Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi) and Gilles (Stephane Freiss) are read aloud. Each party has reclaimed personal belongings; their 4-year-old son will live with his mother, with equitable visits from Dad.
After signing the papers, Marion and Gilles repair to a hotel room. There, a long scene as powerful as it is strange transpires. Without visual fanfare, pic embarks on a reverse chronology spanning the years between this admission of failure and the moment the protags met and anything seemed possible. Title refers to "5" developments in the lives of its "2" central characters.
Pic is subtle, yet cumulatively harsh, in its insights into human behavior. It integrates ordinary pleasures, anxiety, joy, doubt and loneliness into a slightly melancholy portrait that's deceptively simple but never dull. Although Ozon is out to tell a story about straight people, homosexual overtones hover. Auds will have to decide whether the couple portrayed is uniquely French or more universal.
After getting a glimpse of Marion and Gilles' son, the viewer hears a perversely intriguing story at a dinner party the couple is hosting for Gilles' gay brother, Christophe (Antoine Chappey), and his latest b.f., Mathieu (Marc Ruchmann). Continuing to travel back through time, the audience is privy to the circumstances of the child's birth, witnesses a highly unconventional feature of the couple's wedding night and finally see what drew Marion and Gilles together in the first place.
The countdown format adds a certain poignancy to everything that's shown, but there's no punchline or culminating revelation. Everything that happens is perfectly credible and no single event points to the inevitability of divorce. There's nary an "Ah-ha!" in sight, just human strengths and weaknesses in the course of a garden-variety heterosexual union.
In the press notes, Ozon says he joked on set, "We start off like Bergman and end up like Lelouch." This isn't such a bad way of admitting that the greatest intensity infuses the beginning of the film (including a trick or two borrowed from "Scenes From a Marriage"), and that each of the five titular episodes reps a different broad category of approaches to filmic storytelling.
Bruni-Tedeschi and Freiss are completely believable as a couple. Francoise Fabian and Michael Lonsdale register keenly as Marion's parents, and Geraldine Pailhas is fine as Gilles' prior g.f.
Except for its reverse structure, Ozon's seventh feature in as many years is definitely his most conventional work. These are normal characters anchored in the real world.
Italian pop songs surge forth as ironic punctuation.
Camera (color), Yorick Le Saux; editor, Monica Coleman; music, Philippe Rombi; production designer, Katia Wyszkop; costume designer, Pascaline Chavanne; sound (Dolby), Jean-Pierre Laforce, Jean-Pierre Duret, Brigitte Tallandier; assistant director, Hubert Barbin; casting, Antoinette Boulat. Reviewed at Publicis Champs-Elysees, Paris, June 15, 2004. (Also in Venice Film Festival -- competing.) Running time: 90 MIN.

 


At first glance, Fran Ozon 's 5x2  seems the most conventional—or at least unoriginal—movie this maturing French enfant terrible has made: a sober dissection of an abortive marriage utilizing the reverse-chronology trick that Harold Pinter  employed in his adultery study Betrayal  and that Ozon's fellow provocateur Gaspar Noé recently applied to his cockeyed vision of domestic disaster Irreversible . But where Noé's pretentious exploitation flick grinds its way backward to a trite avowal that "time destroys everything," Ozon's deceptively placid and subtly unpredictable drama is a more radical film—and in a sense a more violent one. Habitually concerned with the perils of coupledom, the director here launches a comprehensive assault on the traditional heterosexual model of family and marriage.
So titled because it consists simply of five key moments in the life of an ordinary couple, 5x2  begins at the end—and the conclusion of this relationship is nothing if not definitive. Marion  (Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi ) and Gilles (Stéphane Freiss ) sit in glazed silence listening to the terms of their divorce—the grim, interminable minutiae of custody arrangements and financial obligations. Not content merely with declaring this union legally dead, Ozon stages a necrophilic desecration: The exes, having just agreed to "revoke all advantages granted during their marriage," proceed to a hotel room for a bout of breakup sex, and when she changes her mind, he rapes her.
Four more sequences follow: a dinner party, the birth of their son, their wedding night, and finally, the first spark of romance, on a beach in Italy. (The film also juxtaposes its central relationship with other templates: Marion's parents, who despise each other but are committed for the long haul; Gilles's gay brother and his younger lover, who have an open relationship that may or may not work as well as they claim it does.) 5x2  begs to be read as evidence, sifted for signs of strain—and we do see Gilles and Marion commit at least one treacherous act each-—but there's nothing quite so conclusive as a turning point. The irreducible complexity of their relationship is implicit in the mysterious ellipses. If anything, 5x2 , with its big blocks of negative space, gets more opaque the further back it rewinds. Hindsight is of minimal benefit here.
5x2 's chronology suggests a trajectory akin to Noé's and Pinter's—a sadly ironic progression from misery to a now extinguished bliss, but again, it's not that simple. The film casts a steely eye on the beginning of Gilles and Marion's romance—which, like so many, is intimately connected to the death of other relationships and the selfish thirst for new sensation. Ozon, who routinely gravitates to bodies of water, orchestrates an inspired final shot at once poignant and horrific: two new lovers wading into the sea as the sun sets (the ridiculous postcard-perfection of the image underscored by the fact that it's morning). The sudden flowering of irrational, overwhelming optimism is unnerving—it mirrors the workings of a passion-addled mind, not to mention the dangerous and all too human urge to freeze a perfect moment in time. 5x2  tacitly interrogates the tyrannizing ideals and hypocritical norms that compel people into doomed relationships that persist long enough for lasting damage to occur. In other words, it's less an anti-marriage movie than a pro-divorce one. Its real happy ending may be the one that happens at the very beginning.
