It's true, there are nine songs in 9 Songs , including concert performances by such cachet headbangers as Franz Ferdinand, the Dandy Warhols, and Super Furry Animals. It's also true that nobody will go to see Michael Winterbottom's sexually explicit, novelty-act drama — a naughty peep show for sobersides, disguised as a nature documentary — to hear the songs; everyone will go to see the shagging, which occupies the majority of the screen time.
Wait, that's not entirely true: A few fetishists turned on by March of the Penguins  may want to check out 9 Songs  for the occasional shots of icy, shifting Antarctic land masses that Winterbottom includes, with deadpan art-house seriousness. The sex, you see, is being remembered in all its mutability and low-lit, musky, non-French grittiness by Matt (Kieran O'Brien, who also worked with Winterbottom on the director's bopping 24 Hour Party People ), a glaciologist who misses the heat of his short love affair with Lisa (newcomer Margo Stilley). Lisa was American, she was young, she was free and wild and hot to trot. And the couple trotted often and enthusiastically, between bouts of which they went to rock concerts and made out to the beat of Primal Scream and the Von Bondies.
But while Matt (a British blank) was in love, Lisa (an even blanker American) was more in like. And then she left for the U.S., causing Matt to abandon their bedsheets for ice sheets. Which is why Matt tells his story from a frigid platform at the ends of the earth. In deference to the seriousness of global warming (plus in light of the couple's responsible use of condoms), the film is being released here unrated.
Anyhow, back to the shagging. It's real — or as real as it can be between two actors naked in front of a camera — and sometimes it's arousing. (That's one woman's opinion; results may vary.) But get this: The filmmaker has said he wants 9 Songs  to be drama about real sex that's not erotic. As if an admission of erotic intent somehow cheapens the aesthetics. And so a viewer's question might reasonably be, Who are ya kidding? And also: Did Matt see any penguins Doing It down there in the Antarctic?

 The notion that our sexual behavior is the purest expression of our deepest selves is delicately explored in "9 Songs," Michael Winterbottom's lyrical, graphically explicit chronicle of an ordinary love affair between two attractive people. The movie isn't the first art film to show real as opposed to simulated sex, but it's the first to scrutinize at length one couple's bedroom etiquette in a search for their identities. If anything, "9 Songs," conceived and directed by Mr. Winterbottom, the British filmmaker responsible for movies like "In This World" and "Welcome to Sarajevo," that boldly enter the topical fray, proves that showing what people do in bed may not reveal all that much. The truth lies hidden in their minds.  Matt (Kieran O'Brien), the narrator, is a British glaciologist remembering the recent past during an expedition to Antarctica. Lisa (Margo Stilley), the frisky, gamine lover he recalls with a mixture of fondness, exasperation and desire, is a headstrong 21-year-old American he meets at a rock concert in London.  With sexually explicit love scenes that depict the arc of their relationship in encounters that grow increasingly complicated and emotionally tricky, this brave, melancholy, unabashedly romantic movie would like to be the film many had hoped to see in the post-"Deep Throat" era. Three decades ago, when pornographic movie houses proliferated, and a love scene between Julie Christie and Donald Sutherland in Nicolas Roeg's "Don't Look Now" strongly suggested that actual sex was being filmed, the prospect of the final barrier's being breached seemed imminent. But somehow it never happened. And then came the AIDS epidemic.  Mr. Winterbottom's film unfolds as the cinematic equivalent of a sustained rock ballad in which live performances attended by the couple in concert halls around London are interwoven with scenes of intimacy that might be compared to electric guitar riffs. The mostly melodic songs, by groups like Black Rebel Motorcycle Club, the Dandy Warhols and Primal Scream, are intended to comment on the relationship. But the songs are too obscure and their lyrics too unintelligible for a coherent dialogue between the concert hall and the bedroom.  As you watch Matt and Lisa make love (with condoms during intercourse), nagging questions hover. Who are they? Are they characters in a predetermined scenario that takes them into mild kinkiness (playful bondage, a visit to a table-dancing club, where a naked dancer tempts them)? Or are we watching actors improvise a screen relationship that may or may not be taking place offscreen? We never know. And without the anchor of a developed screenplay, they remain frustratingly elusive.  During the sex scenes, handsomely photographed in natural light, you never sense genuine abandonment. While not overtly self-conscious in front of the camera, both actors (but especially Mr. O'Brien) play it emotionally safe.  Scattered clues suggest who these people might be. In a voice-over, Matt describes Lisa as "egotistical, careless and crazy." And as the affair progresses, there are signs that the last of these adjectives may be accurate. Matt and Lisa sniff cocaine, but Lisa also takes unidentified pills of which Matt disapproves when they leave her groggy and irritable.  Lisa has a streak of emotional and physical violence. She boasts of her sexual encounters with men of different nationalities. In one love scene she declares that she wants to bite Matt's lip until it bleeds and causes him physical pain. In another she slaps him lightly across the face. Early in the movie Matt says he loves her and jumps into the icy sea to prove it, and she shouts back that she loves him too. But from that point on, the word love is never mentioned.  Matt's impressions of Antarctica strain for metaphoric weight. Close to the South Pole, he observes, "claustrophobia and agoraphobia are in the same place, like two people in a bed." The fact that Lisa doesn't get her own commentary gives Matt the advantage and lends the movie the slight flavor of a locker-room tale told at a woman's expense.  But "9 Songs," for all its failed ambitions and its tinge of sexism, is lovely to watch. Especially when it forsakes the concert hall and visits the English seaside, the film acquires the high romantic gloss of "A Man and a Woman." At such moments, Matt and Lisa begin to suggest prototypical, somewhat idealized modern lovers, two pretty people inviting a soft-core fantasy of romance at twilight.
Michael Winterbottom  has the charged air of a Rimbaudian decadent—he's hell-bent on trying everything once, and if he gives up filmmaking to traverse Antarctica  or sculpt earthworks, we shouldn't be shocked. What makes this hungry hopscotching fascinating is a sense of moral anchorage that has bled out of each film since Jude  (1996). Having modernized Hardy, rectified the war journalist paradigm, carved up the Euro–melting pot, reacquainted us with the front row of pop music history, traveled the refugee trail of tears, and DNA'd Alphaville , Winterbottom now turns inward, to the sweaty chemicals between us. Barely a movie, 9 Songs  is closer to a feature-length Su Friedrich  rumination, or a channel toggle between Fuse and amateur porn. Both structuralist and transgressive in the time-honored manner of avant-garde cinema, the film isn't ostentatiously postmod, but is instead focused, like a New Wave idyll, on the intimate hang time and private buzz of contemporary sex-love.
Or maybe not: 9 Songs  is so simple you could hold it up to different lights and get different spectra. The titular tunes are live concert roars by the Von Bondies , Franz Ferdinand , the Dandy Warhols , etc. Between them, a thirtyish Brit man (Kieran O'Brien ) and a reedy, Maggie Gyllenhaal –esque American girl (Margo Stilley ) fuck, suck, make coffee, lounge, and fuck and suck some more. That's it—but in the process, naturally, the relationship rises on a crest of lust, levels out in recreational contentment (the couple attend the concerts and begin to do dope), and then descends into an unexplained funk, potently limned in a scene where Stilley's whimsical gamine opts for a vibrator alone rather than her partner and his Ron Jeremy –sized wanker.
Shot in gritty, handheld DV, the movie becomes about its own strange dullness and our mutual distance—the more sex the characters have, the more we stand outside their satisfying delirium, and that goes for the concert experiences as well. We know little about the lovers, and their dialogue is thoughtless and trivial. Implicit in the fugue is a critique of associative movie watching; Winterbottom never provides the empathic connective tissue we expect. Love it or not, 9 Songs  amounts to a common human rite fastidiously caught in amber, giving off no heat or joy but crystallized for the future.
