
For gay New Yorker Adam (Craig Chester), a lot can change in 17 years. The clubs he would strut through with cigarette in hand are now smoke-free. The skyline he once admired from the Brooklyn Bridge is now without its Twin Towers. And, after a cocaine-fueled one-night stand left him -- and his floors -- a complete mess, Adam, too, is not the same as he once was.
Written and directed by Chester, "Adam & Steve" follows former goth Adam and dancer-turned-doctor Steve (Malcolm Gets) as they attempt to start a meaningful relationship without realizing they've met in 1987 under less desirable circumstances.
Adam is still recovering from a drug addiction spawned from his first "bump" of coke that fateful night. Steve is now an obsessive-compulsive with commitment issues. You may remember Gets as sharp-tongued colorist Richard on ''Caroline in the City," who transformed from pretentious aspiring painter to doting love interest over the course of the series.
He makes a similar turn here early in the movie, realizing, "Maybe I'm tired of one hot sexual encounter after another. Maybe I want to find out what it's like to have OK sex with the same person on a regular basis." The film does its best to portray their post-Sept. 11 New York romance without taking itself too seriously.
The two are joined by their pals, formerly fat comedian Rhonda (a hilarious Parker Posey) and Steve's roommate Michael (a butched-up Chris Kattan). Posey supplies some of the funniest lines in the movie ("I'm sweating like Whitney Houston going through customs!"), and each scene could benefit from having a little more of her in it.
Despite Chester's history as a veteran of New Queer Cinema (including work in such edgy indie flicks as "Swoon" and"Frisk"), "Adam & Steve" isn't groundbreaking material, settling instead for a grab bag of sight gags, toilet humor, and pop culture references.
Still, the movie does address many of the issues facing gay couples with as much dignity as any romantic comedy could allow. There are enough universal laughs -- both meeting-the-parents scenes are hysterically uncomfortable, as is Adam's realized fear that every time he and a lover share public affection, guys from New Jersey hurl beer bottles at him.
The downside of this strategy is that for every shtick that works, there are two that don't. "Adam & Steve" is not the knee-slapper it wants to be, but it's endearing nonetheless.


         Much of Craig Chester's good-hearted love story "Adam & Steve" is silly and contrived, but the film boasts four engaging actors, including Chester. In 1987, a shy goth kid, Adam (Chester), and a go-go dancer, Steve (Malcolm Gets), meet at a Manhattan disco and experience a disastrously aborted one-night stand. Years later they cross paths and, not recognizing each other, fall in love. Crucial to their story are their best friends, Adam's pal Rhonda (Parker Posey), a comedian who has lost her inspiration, and Steve's cynical straight roommate Michael (Chris Kattan). Chester's humor is decidedly hit-and-miss, but he's a shameless heart-tugger.
 
 "Adam & Steve"
 (Unrated) Running time: 1 hour, 39 minutes. At Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd. (323) 848-3500; Playhouse, 673 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena (626) 844-6500; University Town Center, 4245 Campus Drive, Irvine (949) 854-8818; Art, 2025 E. 4th St., Long Beach (562) 438-5435.


         






    

 Who said mainstream Hollywood has a monopoly on dumb, gross-out farces? The gay, independent comedy "Adam & Steve" is as crude and nonsensical as any number of B-list studio equivalents, with the added disadvantages of a low budget and shaky direction by Craig Chester, who wrote and also stars.  When the title characters meet in a downtown New York club in 1987, Adam (Mr. Chester) is a timid gay goth clinging to his obese best friend, Rhonda (Parker Posey in a fat suit). Steve (Malcolm Gets), a buff, glitter-clad dancer flying on cocaine, makes a beeline for him.  The movie then spins its preposterous story of love interruptus around a scatological money shot:  Steve's explosive reaction when the baby laxative used to cut the coke aborts his precoital striptease, leaving him traumatized for the next 18 years.  Skip to 2005. Adam, now a recovering cocaine addict, leads bird-watching expeditions in Central Park. Steve, a psychiatrist, takes pity on Adam when he brings his injured dog to a hospital. The two fail to recognize each other, but the old spark reignites, and soon they are dating seriously. Will they make it through the minefields of Adam's insecurity and Steve's addiction to quickies with strangers in gym shower stalls to the land of happily ever after?  The movie's funnier jokes revolve around Rhonda, now a svelte standup comic whose act consists of self-loathing fat jokes delivered in a tone of weary hostility to bored audiences of five. An additional laugh or two is squeezed out of Steve's introduction to Adam's accident-prone family, who are propped around the dinner table in casts and braces.  None of it holds together. "Adam & Steve" purports to believe in true love. But the lovers' clinches are so clumsy and heat-free that the actors appear to be wincing through their osculatory chores: not a promising indicator of bliss unto eternity.

Gay Gotham farce written, directed and starring veteran actor Craig Chester ("Swoon," "Kiss Me Guido") delivers plenty of well-timed slapstick, a brace of oddball zanies and a couple of show-stopper musical numbers. Material is uneven, but rhythm and pacing keep action moving smartly. Snappy romantic comedy sports enough name players, including SNL alumnus Chris Kattan and, on the distaff side, Parker Posey, Julie Hagerty and Melinda Dillon, to rep potential crossover appeal, though broad humor may nettle older urban auds and unabashedly gay frame of reference could limit heartland play. 
In 1987, high school sprig Adam (Chester), in full white-face, black goth regalia, along with gal pal Rhonda (a startlingly obese, fat-suited Parker Posey), wander into the Danceteria. Adam's eye is caught by the fully-displayed attributes of glittery glam dancer Steve (Malcolm Gets of "Caroline in the City"), who promptly turns the substance virgin onto drugs.
Several "bumps" later, the two go back to Adam's place for torrid sex. But a combination of coke cut with baby laxative and a boastful flexing of Steve's impressive gluteus maximus mortifyingly nips any romance in the bud, and creates in Steve a rare traumatic memory of sexual embarrassment.
Seventeen years later, the now mutually unrecognizable men meet in a psycho ward: A hysterical Adam has been sent here for medical help for his accidentally stabbed dog, which is duly patched up by psychiatrist-in-residence Steve.
The two are a study in contrasts. Steve is successful, physically fit and a phobic slut, his frequent encounters mainly conducted in showers where he can neurotically scrub down partners while screwing them. Adam, a timid, introverted underachiever, works in Central Park as a birdwatcher tour guide when not attending AA meetings chaired by manic ex-addict Sally Kirkland.
The two men fall in love and all is hunky-dory -- until Steve realizes that Adam previously witnessed the most humiliating moment of his life.
Helmer Chester deploys a wide range of comic tones and types. Adam's family, headed by a beaming Julie Hagerty, takes accident-proneness to new heights. Steve's clan, on the other hand, is a nightmare of normalcy, Melinda Dillon's earnest attempts to fit her son's Jewish lover within the confines of her Midwest Christian experience producing sprightly conversational ice-breakers along the lines of "Jesus was a Jew."
But comic kudos definitely belong to a now-svelte Posey as she delivers her failed stand-up comedy routine -- consisting entirely of fat jokes -- to a comatose nightclub audience of five.
Chester's Adam, effortlessly able to slide from bathos to pathos and back again with none of the smarmy schmaltz of sitcom humanism, is a marvel of nuanced comic timing. Gets' Steve, though quite adequate as the film's much-fetishized sexual object of affection, creates less depth, coming off as too whitebread for his neurosis to afford more than just a single, great soapy visual gag.
Real surprise, however, are the excellent dance numbers. The first, everyone's fantasy of Terpsichorean empowerment, features a showdown between the estranged lovers in the form of a cowboy line-dance, the hitherto two-left-footed Adam suddenly gifted with the ability to gracefully leap, somersault, whirl and slide with professional panache. The second, a choral offering sung in a bar, so touches everyone that even homophobic slur-casting neighbors are empathetically moved to tears.
Camera (color, Super 16mm-to-35mm), Carl F. Bartels; editor, Phyllis K. Housen; music, Roddy Bottum; music supervisor, Michael Lloyd; production designer, Cecil Gentry; costume designer, Carol Cutshall; sound (Dolby Digital), Craig Clark; casting, Billy Hopkins, Suzanne Crowley, Kerry Barden. Reviewed at NewFest, New York, June 11, 2005. Running time: 99 MIN.
 


Though flawed in the way of so many romantic comedies (i.e., much weaker with the romance than with the comedy), writer-director Craig Chester 's debut is truly enjoyable. Lighthearted and funny, it falters only in the rare moments when it takes itself too seriously. The film opens in the late '80s, when protagonist Adam (played by Chester) is a shy, self-loathing goth whose best friend is a fat-suited Parker Posey . Flash-forward 17 years, and both are still single and self-sabotaging. Then Adam meets Steve (Malcolm Gets ) and begins a monogamous relationship with all the usual trappings: musical montage, overwritten flirtation, and lifelong neuroses miraculously resolved. But Chester has found a tone that's both knowing and sweet, ironic and heartfelt; he places his characters in cringingly compromising positions, but never condescends to them. The result is a maturity that transcends the movie's silly notions of romance.
