
You've spent two decades in prison for a crime you didn't commit. You've just been exonerated thanks to DNA evidence. You're free. Now
 where are you going to go?
Certainly not Disneyland, as "After Innocence" shows with bleak and patient sympathy. Jessica Sanders's documentary, a special jury award winner at Sundance in 2005, focuses on a group of men who have been released with the help of the Innocence Project, an organization formed in 1992 by Peter Neufeld and ex-O.J. Simpson attorney Barry Scheck for the express purpose of springing the wrongfully convicted. The process of rejoining the living isn't easy before the cell doors open, and it's not easy afterward.
Nick Yarris, a soft-spoken but eerily intense man who spent 23 years on death row for a murder he didn't do, points out that he'd have had more access to social services if he'd been guilty and paroled; instead, he received $5 and a handshake from the state of Pennsylvania. That embarrassed institutional response is common to all the exonerees profiled in "After Innocence." In many cases, the men's criminal records still stand, making it nearly impossible to find employment. On the most prosaic level, their lives remain crippled. "People don't know he's out because he's innocent," says the mother of Vincent Moto. "They just know he's out."
The film's eight subjects are as varied as Sanders and her producer and co-writer, Marc H. Simon, can make them. Scott Hornoff is a white former Rhode Island policeman who served 6 1/2 years for murder and was freed only after the real killer confessed; Hornoff has had to fight, successfully, to win reinstatement and back pay. Ronald Cotton, an African-American who spent 11 years in prison for rape -- he's a mug-shot double for the man who actually did it -- has forged a unique and lasting friendship with victim Jennifer Thompson-Canino. The two now speak publicly about the perils of eyewitness identification, and Thompson-Canino is touchingly blunt about working off her guilt.
The most troubling subject is Wilton Dedge, whom the state of Florida refused for two years
 to release from life in prison for aggravated sexual battery, despite DNA proof it had the wrong man. The film follows his court appearances alongside Innocence Project attorney Nina Morrison, other lawyers, and Dedge's steadfast parents as they all fight upstream against incomprehensible bureaucratic intransigence.
As with many of the subjects, Dedge's lack of anger and capacity for forgiveness seem astounding to an outsider. After 22 years in jail he's finally freed, but the filmmakers have made their point: State prosecutors will do anything to save their conviction rates. Says Louisiana assistant district attorney Hugo Holland of exoneree Calvin Willis, "The system worked the way it was supposed to, even if he was innocent." The willful institutional blindness on display here is breathtaking.
"After Innocence" isn't bravura filmmaking, and it doesn't have to be -- this is one of those documentaries where the subject is compelling enough to do the legwork. Sanders is more interested in specific human struggles than in larger political points, but she knows these men form a mosaic with a message that's unmistakable. (Her mother is Freida Lee Mock, Oscar-winning director of "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision," so maybe Sanders has documentary chops in her own DNA.)
The film ends on both uplifting and disturbing notes. Massachusetts passes a bill providing compensation for exonerees, prompting gruff ex-con Dennis Maher to burst into tears. Herman Atkins is studying for a psychology degree and has reconciled with his California patrolman father, who once believed in his son's guilt.
Vincent Moto's criminal record is still on the books in Philadelphia, though. No one knows how many innocents languish in American prisons without DNA evidence to acquit them. And the file drawers of the Innocence Project bulge with letters from men who insist they didn't do it.
.


The suggestion blind justice may sometimes be too blind for its own good burns at the heart of "After Innocence," a powerfully affecting documentary on the subject of wrongful convictions overturned by DNA evidence. Raising awareness as it raises questions about the integrity of the American legal system, Showtime-produced feature (which collected a Special Jury Prize at Sundance) should draw sizable numbers of socially conscious viewers in both theatrical and small-screen settings.
Working together with writing and producing partner Marc H. Simon, Sanders turns her camera on seven wrongfully imprisoned men who have been belatedly exonerated as the result of DNA testing. Employing a direct, unfussy style, pic is structured as a series of first-person testimonials in which Sanders' subjects recount the entire arcs of their cases, from the moment of arrest to the moment of release. What emerges is a complex and deeply troubling portrait of crime and punishment in America.
Perhaps pic's most alarming tale -- among a number of remarkable stories that highlight injustice, courage and endurance -- is that of Florida inmate Wilton Dedge, who in 2001 used DNA evidence to prove himself innocent of sexual battery charges. Yet Dedge remained behind bars for an additional three years as local authorities fought to uphold his original conviction.
Such incidents are more rule than exception in "After Innocence," and Sanders is particularly good at drawing attention to the bureaucracy that inhibits the swift execution of justice while maintaining a facade of infallibility. (One of the pic's other subjects, falsely convicted rapist Vincent Moto, still awaits the expunging of his criminal record, some nine years after his exoneration.)
Yet the real focus of Sanders' pic becomes not the harrowing path leading to exoneration, but the equally perilous one that follows from it. Unlike parolees, who re-enter society with an extensive network of social services at their disposal, exonerees are comparatively cut loose with no safety net; they are rejected by the system that imprisoned them, yet equally unwelcome by a society that continues to regard them as damaged goods. Though "After Innocence" is an unquestionably (and rightfully) angry film, rooted in that long tradition of activist agitprop, what impresses most is the manner in which it keeps its outrage (and that of its subjects) simmering just beneath a reasoned surface. At every turn, Sanders resists the impulse to appear overtly emotional.
And though many of the pic's subjects would surely have been executed were it not for DNA, "After Innocence" refuses to narrowly focus on the death-penalty debate (though it does examine the work of the Innocence Project, the human rights organization co-founded by attorneys Barry Scheck and Peter Neufeld). Instead, the pic sets its sights on something far more ambitious: the ideal of a nation that can effectively police its streets without turning into a police state.
Camera (color, DV), Shana Hagan, Buddy Squires, Bestor Cram, Bob Richmond; editor, Brian Johnson; music, Charles Bernstein. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 22, 2005. Running time: 95 MIN.

 


What does it feel like to be imprisoned for a crime you did not do? After Innocence  documents the stories of seven prisoners who were exonerated and set free. Scott Hornoff , a Rhode Island  police detective, spent six years in prison for first-degree murder; Calvin Willis  was in a Louisiana prison for 22 years on a rape charge; and Dennis Maher , a former army sergeant from Massachusetts, was convicted of rape and imprisoned for 19 years. There is no shortage of heartbreaking footage. Four months after leaving prison, Dennis is still sleeping on a pullout sofa in his parents' house. Calvin struggles to get a GED and find paying work. Scott goes to court to get his job back as well as his pension and back pay; he wins, but then the police department appeals the judge's decision.
These men were forgotten while they were locked up, and they are forgotten again on the outside. Most receive no money and no help. They struggle to rebuild their lives and to undo the soul-destroying effects of prison. One pounds on a punching bag to release his rage; another pursues a degree in psychology. After Innocence  is both riveting and disturbing. Each man's story reminds us how fallible our legal system is—and each raises the question: How many other innocent people are still locked up?
