 "You can't hold a gun if you're holding an air guitar."  That Cheech and Chong sentiment is the manifesto of this documentary's title subculture, in which pantomiming  aspiring rockers compete for the right to represent their country in a global championship based in Oulou, Finland. The movement, such as it is, aims to unite a war-torn planet in musical fantasy and to rawwwwwwk! — but not necessarily in that order.  It sounds like the premise of a reality show. Sure enough, according to news releases, this breezy 82-minute movie is descended from an aborted VH-1 series overseen by Magical Elves Productions, the makers of "Project Runway" and "Last Comic Standing." Stylistically, it's nothing special, apart from its T-shirt-ready freeze-frames and lucid, playful editing (by Conor O'Neill). Like "Spellbound," "Murderball" and other competition documentaries, it's a valentine to underdog dreamers: "Rocky" gone basic cable.  But the movie's wild performances and droll humor are tough to resist. So are its obsessive yet self-mocking heroes: the Los Angeles-based actor David  Jung, who performs as C-Diddy, who has a kung phooey stage persona and wears a Hello Kitty pouch like a warrior's breastplate; and the New York writer-musician Dan Crane, a k a Björn Turöque, whose parched wit and jackhammer performance style suggest Bill Murray trapped in the body of Sid Vicious. Mr. Crane also wrote and sang the closing credits theme, a garage band anthem that lodges in the brain like a fishhook.  "Air Guitar Nation" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes profanity and some adult (if not necessarily mature) themes.

With equal measures of showmanship, patriotism and irony, hundreds vie at NYC's Pussycat Lounge for the East Coast Division of the first-ever nationwide air guitar championship for the right to eventually represent the U.S. at the world championship. Meanwhile, back in Finland, the current world champ frets that the influx of Americans could corrupt the form's purity. Alexandra Lipsitz's often hilarious documentary (with almost everyone in on the joke) won the audience award at SXSW and is spawning a cult following that could snowball in release.
Faces contorted, bodies vibrating, fingers gripped convulsively around non-existent strings, contestants get one minute apiece to practice their art. Actor David "C-Diddy" Jung uses a kung fu style to advance to the finals at the Roxy in Los Angeles. There, he manages to defeat the West Coast faves as well as the New York runner-up, Dan "Bjorn Turoque" Crane.
In Finland, C-Diddy faces some fierce competitors, not least Bjorn Turoque, who never lets a little thing like losing hold him back.
Though the Intl. Championships have been held since 1996, it is not until 2003 that Americans have joined the fray. National costumes range from a basic white toga to silver lame to nothing at all.
Lipsitz's docu trips along with a straight-ahead, brisk tone that validates this seemingly nutty activity -- "airness," as it turns out, involves not simple imitation like lip-synching, but mastering a mystical, abstract that transcends simulation.
At the same time, the admitted ridiculousness of the endeavor is lost on no one, and indeed constitutes much of the appeal of air guitar -- supposedly nobody can merchandise it because it doesn't exist. It's possible, though, that Lipsitz's documentary could provide, ironically, a stepping-stone toward commercialization.
Tech credits are fine, Conor O'Neill's editing particularly sharp in the performances.
Camera (color, DV), Anthony Sacco; editor, Conor O'Neil; music, Dan Crane; sound, Keith Garcia, Douglas Carney. Reviewed at Tribeca Film Festival (Midnight), April 30, 2006. Running time: 78 MIN.
With: David "C-Diddy" Jung, Dan "Bjorn Turoque" Crane.
 


My long strums are pretty fucking tight," gushes one faux-ax-stroker in this slick, hilarious, and at times even suspenseful ode to competitive mock-rock and/or the further decline of Western civ . Power-chord mimes here include Krye Tuff, Björn Türoque , and the kung-fu-styled C. Diddy , who handily wins stateside air-solo honors and proceeds to the world cup in Finland , whereupon nationalist air-envy takes center stage and this American Idle turns, uh, political. Director Alexandra Lipsitz  plays her own instrument impeccably, not pushing too hard for humor (the material is outrageous enough on its own), nor resting on crowd-pleasing absurdity at the expense of vital journalistic investigation (e.g., she gets Türoque's mom to pull out one of the kid's old report cards, which indeed explains a lot). Nary a dull lick in the entire 80 minutes.
