 “Celebrity trumps ideology,” Al Franken says in the new documentary that bears both his name and God’s. The occasion for this observation is a party, given by Newsweek around the time of the 2004 Republican National Convention, at which Mr. Franken hobnobs, rather awkwardly, with other well-known people who dwell mainly to his right on the political spectrum. (Henry A. Kissinger is there, and so is Alan K. Simpson, former Republican senator from Wyoming.)  And it is true that people touched by the dominant forms of modern fame — tabloid notoriety, box-office appeal, media exposure and so on — are in many ways more alike than different, whatever their views on the issues of the day. But it is also the case that Mr. Franken, like his principal adversaries (some appear in the film), represents a relatively new and rapidly proliferating species: the ideological celebrity, hero to partisans and anathema to foes, who reaps money and renown throwing red (or, as the case may be, blue) meat to true believers.  “Al Franken: God Spoke,” directed by Chris Hegedus and Nick Doob, is perhaps best viewed as an investigation of the phenomenon of ideological celebrity, with Mr. Franken as a willing case study. But to the extent that the ferocious polarization of which his fame is a symptom extends into the moviegoing public, the film is more likely to attract or repel viewers according to the sides they’ve already chosen.  In other words, anyone who shares Bill O’Reilly’s  view (cited in the film) that Mr. Franken is “a vile human being” is unlikely to want to spend 90 cinéma vérité minutes in his company, while those who think (to quote the title of Mr. Franken’s first polemical best seller) that “Rush Limbaugh is a big fat idiot” will be more inclined to buy a ticket.  But even his fans may find themselves frustrated, since the film observes Mr. Franken closely without generating much insight into him. Like many other comedians, he seems to be performing constantly. And like many other comedians, he is evidently angry, though he is driven not by psychic torment but by moral fury at the Republican Party and the conservative news media.  “Al Franken: God Spoke” gives him plenty of time to express this anger, and also to crack a few jokes, but not really enough to present his arguments. Those can be found in his books or on his radio show.  The movie is more interested in process and personality, and in the things a public figure does on his way onstage and off. In this it is true to its pedigree. Ms. Hegedus was a co-director on both “The War Room” (with D. A. Pennebaker, her husband and an executive producer of this film) and “Startup.com” (with Jehane Noujaim, who went on to make “Control Room”). These documentaries are part of a tradition of fly-on-the-wall, behind-the-scenes films about well-known figures or public events,  going back at least to Mr. Pennebaker’s 1967 Bob Dylan documentary,  “Don’t Look Back.”  The point is less to explain those people and happenings than to alter your perspective by bringing you in close. “Al Franken: God Spoke” is not quite biographical, though it does include some old “Saturday Night Live” clips and a visit by Mr. Franken to the house in Minnesota where he spent his childhood.  Unfortunately, it does not answer the most interesting question about him, which is how he went from being a writer, stand-up performer and sketch comedy fixture to being a liberal scourge, best-selling fact checker, radio host and possible contender for his old friend Paul Wellstone’s seat in the United States Senate.  Instead, the movie follows him through an eventful passage in this second career, taking in a period that includes the rocky beginnings of the Air America Radio network, the 2004 conventions and that year’s presidential election. Mr. Franken hustles from one event to the next, pausing to rest his aching back, to wink at the camera, and to banter with his wife, Franni.  As Election Day approaches, he ponders the etiquette of gloating, and then keeps going when the occasion for gloating evaporates. He encounters Ann Coulter, Sean Hannity and Michael Medved. Like him, they never seem to get tired or to waver in their convictions. Which is probably what separates them, as ideological celebrities, from the rest of us.

Documakers Nick Doob and Chris Hegedus cast an admiring eye on a liberal gadfly in "Al Franken: God Spoke," a cinema-verite portrait that proves more celebratory than revelatory. Smoothly paced, well-crafted pic should greatly please auds attuned to Franken's prickly wit and iconoclastic commentary and might even engage some right-leaning nonfans who grudgingly respect his smartly satirical sass. If it manages to tap into the same undercurrents of discontent and frustration that fueled the breakthrough success of "Fahrenheit 9/11," doc could post surprisingly impressive theatrical numbers. But even if "God Spoke" speaks only to the converted, that may be enough to generate brisk B.O. and homevid biz.
Pic follows Franken through more than a year of seemingly nonstop activity. He begins by savoring a sweet victory against Fox News, which had filed an ill-advised lawsuit against him for daring to use the phrase "fair and balanced" in the subtitle of his book "Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them." The lawsuit (reportedly urged by Fox News superstar Bill O'Reilly, the frequent target of Franken's mockery) was summarily dismissed by an openly derisive judge. Better still - for Franken, at least - the resulting publicity pushed "Lies" to the top of the bestseller charts.
During the next several months, Franken divides his time among publicity tours for his book, public debates with political foes - his confrontation with the famously blond Ann Coulter is hilariously nasty - and early spadework for the startup of Air America, a liberal talkradio network that gets off to a very bumpy start. Doob and Hegedus maintain a sharp focus on their subject throughout his marathon of multitasking and follow him down the campaign trail as he stumps for John Kerry - or, more accurately, against George W. Bush - during the 2004 presidential campaign. When Franken brings his Air America show to the Republican National Convention, pic briefly recalls "The War Room," the Oscar-nominated 1993 doc that Doob shot and Hegedus co-directed (with executive producer D.A. Pennebaker). Before large audiences and in small groups, Franken speaks much like he writes, with equal measures of barbed irreverence, snarky ridicule and, occasionally, passionate outrage. (Describing Air America to potential advisers, he rails against right-wing talkradio's "simplistic black-and-white babble about the way the world works.") With more mischievousness than modesty, he insists that, while dealing with the likes of Coulter and O'Reilly, he isn't really a satirist at all. Rather, he claims, "I take what they say and use it against them. What I do is jujitsu. They say something ridiculous, and I subject them to scorn and ridicule. That's my job."
Franken's apparently very good at that job, judging from the frequent clips of O'Reilly's apoplectic on-air comments about his bete noire. Not surprisingly, pic frames Franken as the clear-cut victor in every duel of wits with outmatched opponents (including Sean Hannity and Michael Medved). In stark contrast, he appears amusingly amateurish during his on-the-job training prior to Air America's debut.
Periodically, filmmakers flash back to Franken's salad days as a "Saturday Night Live" regular during the 1970s. But the funniest "SNL" clip on view here comes from a more recent episode: the instant-classic 2002 segment in which host Al Gore (looser and livelier than he ever seemed during the 2000 election) is comforted by feel-good guru Stuart Smalley (surprise guest Franken).
Despite these flashbacks, however, "God Spoke" never really delves into the reasons and/or motivations behind Franken's transformation from monologist and sketch-comedy performer to political pundit and liberal activist. Indeed, even during intimate moments, Franken rarely comes across as someone given to explaining himself. And except for a few fleeting comments about his late father and his loving wife, he seems most emotionally engaged when preparing or delivering a satirical thrust at someone. On the eve of Election Day 2004, he sounds positively gleeful as he wonders aloud if he can get away with excessive gloating when, not if, Kerry wins the presidency.
(After that setup, by the way, it feels somehow unfair, or at least unsatisfying, that filmmakers fail to show aud how a forlorn Franken made it through his radio program on the morning after.)
Franken seems self-reflective only in the final scenes, as he contemplates reinventing himself once again - this time, as a serious candidate for public office. Trouble is, he admits, he might have to temper the tone of his humor (and avoid anything potentially offensive) if he wants to reach voters. And that, pic suggests, may be a price he'll be unwilling to pay.

Unfocused but brisk (and a tad revealing), this documentary bio of Air America  muckraker, Saturday Night Live   vet, and presumed Senate hopeful Al Franken  plays like a stand-up comedy film to the extent that its subject is rarely if ever offstage. Directors Chris Hegedus  and Nick Doob catch their star launching the "liberal radio network" with The O'Franken Factor ; facing off against Michael Medved  and Sean Hannity ; playing Saddam Hussein  for the troops on his USO tour; impersonating Henry Kissinger  for  Henry Kissinger; and shedding a tear at John Kerry 's concession speech. As the satirist turns to face the voters in Minnesota, flip-flopping on whether to scrub his potty mouth, the film is most compelling for its suggestion of how politics and showbiz are at once incestuously entwined and, perhaps, irreconcilably different. God Spoke  would be a campaign tool except that the star's stridency, however entertaining, suggests a limited potential for conversion. When it comes to dick jokes in Keillor country, all bets are off.
