
Now that it seems that "The Lord of the Rings" director Peter Jackson is the new James Cameron -- the king of both historically lucrative Oscar-winners and of the world -- Cameron is free to show us a less familiar side of himself, one free to say things such as "I like big operations, but this is off the hook!" or "I'm James Cameron, and here's the deal: I love this stuff!"
This is the Cameron we get in "Aliens of the Deep," the "Titanic" director's latest undersea IMAX
 expedition, and the stuff he loves is tooling around the floors of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans for signs of life, which this short (47 minutes!) but absorbing movie finds in abundance.
Cameron, who directs with Steven Quale, announces himself, then recedes into the woodwork, letting the movie's scientists take over as they move to the "edge of photosynthesis" and then beyond it in vessels called submersibles. Their search for living creatures produces unidentified life-forms that appear all the more vivid though the sturdy 3-D glasses given out at the theater. One of the more hypnotic is the undulating thing that looks like a strip of translucent vellum with the pattern of certain insects' wings.
"How could a whole ecosystem be thriving without sunlight?" one of the scientists asks. As the crew tries to think beyond heliocentrism, "Aliens of the Deep" cogently argues that its dives and the results they unearth are crucial analogies of what we might find in exploring space. If life can thrive so far below sea level, then it's more than reasonable for life to exist on, say, Europa, one of Jupiter's moons.
"Aliens of the Deep" stirs excitement about exploration of all kinds. It's also a wonder to behold. One sign of a successful IMAX outing is how it makes you believe you are there in every frame, and this one does. The movie could do without the speculation of what we might find in space, something that looks like an outtake from one of Cameron's movies. If this is what we might turn up, why hop in a space shuttle when we can get it at the video store?
Nonetheless, the sea makes a beautiful corollary to space. This would explain why there are so many astrogeologists and astrobiologists doing oceanographers' work here, and why they're so gleefully astonished when they find chimneys piping what looks like smoke underwater at about 750 degrees (a temperature high enough to melt a submersible).
These scientists' joy for their work is infectious, although when one crew member exclaims, "That is da bomb," it's likely that she's been spending too much time with her kids -- or with James Cameron.


Among the privileges granted to a king of the world is the right to define the geography of his kingdom. Since the triumph of Titanic  in 1997, James Cameron has spent much of his filmmaking time underwater; he has become the Neptune of Hollywood, scuttling about in a submersible, brandishing a camera like a trident. ''Behold the deep in IMAX 3-D!'' he declared two years ago with Ghosts of the Abyss , an educational poke around the real  Titanic wreck that made market-savvy title use of his watery 1989 saga, The Abyss . Now the director is exercising his royal imperative again: ''Behold the deep some more in IMAX 3-D!'' is his magnanimous invitation in Aliens of the Deep , a documentaryish noodle around deep-sea life-forms that makes market-savvy title use of Cameron's creepy 1986 saga, Aliens .
The title may not exude the romantic pull of ''my heart will go on.'' But for those in the mood for old-fashioned IMAX 3-D infotainment — the giant screen, the unwieldy glasses, the science-y stuff leaping out at you so that both you and the kid sitting next to you reach out to touch the air — Cameron's new deep-sea adventure is pleasant and admirable in its very old-fashionedness.  Here, after all, is a voyage that makes use of the very grooviest of scientific and technological advances — vessels that transport the filmmakers and scientists and robotic cameras to probe this utterly sunless realm that is so lethal to earthly life as we know it. It's a logical step, the film suggests, from gazing upon such extraordinary creatures (among them six-foot-long worms and shrimp that thrive on volcanic plumes of scalding water) to positing (and showing) that similar creatures might well exist beneath the oceans of other worlds, including, perhaps, on the moons of Jupiter. Indeed, there's a name for this specialty study: astrobiology.
But gorgeous as the underwater life-forms are, the excitement of Aliens of the Deep  comes from that most old-school, low-tech of elements: real human beings. It turns out that Cameron's canniest move was to assemble a notably attractive, articulate cast of young marine biologists and NASA researchers to accompany him down below. And as these actual articulate, impassioned men and women, with their friendly faces and well-formed sentences, convey the excitement of exploration and research and describe their work to land-based viewers wearing goofy 3-D glasses, they may do more for the future of astrobiology than the sight of a billion far-out shrimp swarming a seabed volcanic chimney. It's good that a kid, and maybe even an adult, may want to ''touch'' one of the so-called aliens thrust out for our inspection. But more important, a kid, and maybe even an adult, may want to become a human scientist, like any one of these inspiring specimens.

hen the director James Cameron proclaimed himself "king of the world" on winning the Oscar for "Titanic," who knew that he also had designs on the rest of the solar system? His newest film, "Aliens of the Deep," is a grandiose hybrid of undersea documentary and outer-space fantasy that begins on our planet's ocean floor and ends many miles under the ice crust that covers Europa, the second moon of Jupiter. The movie's sneaky transition from undersea documentary to speculative fantasy of a journey yet to be undertaken is so seamless that you could easily mistake the last part for the record of an actual space voyage. Filmed in IMAX-3D, this 48-minute film is a visual adventure worthy of that much degraded adjective, awesome. And when the movie is observing the ocean floor where lava from the Earth's inner core is leaking into the water, the strangeness and beauty of an autonomous, teeming ecosystem that has probably existed for two billion years matches any science fiction you could conjure. Mr. Cameron's theory, supported by astrobiologists, is that the life forms found at the deepest levels of the ocean, where no light from the sun penetrates, may hold clues to the nature of possible life in outer space. Even on the Earth, it turns out, the sun isn't the essential be-all and end-all for the existence of life, as was once supposed. Working with scientists at NASA and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Mr. Cameron, who sporadically narrates the film, accompanied by a team of researchers, journeys several miles under the ocean's surface in submersible vehicles. There they observed and photographed the tumultuous undersea world clustered around cracks where emerging lava creates giant chimneys of superheated water. The submersibles resemble spacecraft, complete with smaller modules that venture out from the mother ship. One of the dangers faced by the explorers is venturing too close to a chimney whose heat could melt the windows. For all the caution expressed, the researchers voice no real fear, only wonder at the sights they behold. They include six-foot-long sea worms with crimson plumes; blind white crabs; and thousands, perhaps millions, of tiny white shrimp swarming in and out of the chimneys. Because the imagination of "Aliens of the Deep" is pure Hollywood, the movie can't resist giving us a "Close Encounters" moment when a human hand pressed against the window of a submersible is met by a welcoming, nonhuman tentacle. Could similar environments exist in outer space? Some astrobiologists speculate that a hidden ocean, twice the size of those on Earth, exists many miles under Europa's ice-covered shell. The movie imagines a robotic vehicle that drills through the ice and surveys that ocean, which teems with similar but even more exotic life forms. And so the primal human impulse to explore goes on.
From Piranha II through The Abyss  to Titanic , James Cameron  has demonstrated his affinity for the life aquatic. Hollywood 's King of the World adds depth, literally, to his immersion with a new 47-minute 3-D IMAX  nature doc, Aliens of the Deep.  Lurid title notwithstanding, this underwater exploration—organized by Cameron and some two and a half years in the making—is a Disney  co-pro that deploys canned scientific explanations and a cast of perky marine biologists to establish the requisite sense of theme park awe.
Cameron himself plays the Director, who, no laid-back Steve Zissou , orchestrates a fleet of four submersibles at something like two miles below the surface. "Here's the deal," he barks, breaking the surface of humanoid blandness. And it is a deal: De Niro-voiced sharks, CGI pilot fish, and even the sissified little SpongeBob  have nothing on the bizarre, apparently nameless creatures that Cameron and his crew discover—starting with a fabulously 3-D-friendly cellophane scarf that swims past the submersible porthole. Perhaps the most amazing sight in this often thrilling almost-feelie, which takes as its paradoxical subject the condition of life without light, is the incredible swarm of blind albino shrimps clustered around the smoking "chimneys" formed by volcanic eruptions from beneath the ocean floor. They're not exactly cute, although Disney will be battling Pixar  for rights to the miraculously iridescent, big-eyed, Bambi-eared octopus-ish whatsit that glows prettily for the camera and vanishes back into the deep.
