Whatever popular good will and box office credibility Sandra Bullock reestablished with this summer’s “The Proposal’’ is hereby undone  - no, obliterated
  - with “All About Steve,’’ easily the worst movie of the week, month, year, and Bullock’s entire career. It is to comedy what leprosy once was to the island of Molokai: a plague best contemplated from many miles away.
In a spectacular feat of miscasting, the star plays a California fruitcake named Mary Horowitz who lives with her parents, constructs crossword puzzles for a living, and never stops yammering about the trivia that fizzes around her brain. Mary is supposed to be adorable. She’s not. She’s possibly the most irritating character I’ve ever encountered in a Hollywood movie. Five minutes in her presence produces only a searing pain in one’s frontal lobes and a primal flight response. The other characters understand this. Why don’t the filmmakers?
“All About Steve’’ is about what happens when this frantic oddity goes on a blind date with Steve, an easygoing cable-news cameraman played by Bradley Cooper (“The Hangover’’). Mary’s instantly smitten; Steve is instantly terrified. She devotes a crossword puzzle to him and gets fired. Steve and his blowhard news correspondent (Thomas Haden Church) leave town on assignment; Mary follows them from one disaster hotspot to another. That’s right: It’s a chick-flick for stalkers.
There have been others, but getting the tone right is extremely tricky. Kate Hepburn may have brought down Cary Grant and the house in “Bringing Up Baby,’’ but her character drives some people I know absolutely bananas: She never, ever stops
. So, too, with Bullock, who at certain points in the movie just hops up and down like a Yorkie with a bladder problem. She’s an actress with an appealingly normal persona playing her idea of un-normal  - a painful, even insulting display of “wackiness.’’
But could anyone have made a character out of this collection of tics? The script by Kim Barker traffics in the sloppiest satiric clichés of big bad media versus jes’ plain folks, and director Phil Traill deflates the comedy out of each and every graceless scene. Watching “All About Steve’’ is the entertainment equivalent of driving down the interstate on rims. By the final scenes, Mary has become a national folk hero by falling down a mineshaft along with a little hard-of-hearing tyke (Delaney Hamilton). “Come on, little deaf girl,’’ she says, “let’s go home.’’ She’s about  90 minutes too late.
.

Steve (Bradley Cooper) is a TV cameraman. Mary (Sandra Bullock) is a deranged, chattering woman who throws herself on Steve on their one and only date, then stalks him because she thinks they're meant be together. Oops, sorry, we're not supposed to think of Mary as mentally ill, psychologically unbalanced, or any of those painful things, just full of gumption and sunny determination. But yikes, All About Steve  is a creepy, humiliating ''comedy,'' playing to Bullock's worst instincts for demonstrating the lovability of women who don’t fit in.

See trailer below

 It seems incredible, but the grimly unfunny comedy “All About Steve” might just be the worst movie on Sandra Bullock’s résumé. What makes this insult (to her, to us) even worse is that her production company backed the project. This means that unlike movie stars of the classical studio system, who were contractually obliged by their bosses to sometimes play insulting, trivializing roles, Ms. Bullock, or more likely her representatives, actually tapped people to make her look this bad. She’s the mistress of her own misfortune.  As it often does, an unfortunate hairdo serves as an early indicator of the ensuing trouble. (See also Elizabeth Taylor in “Cleopatra” and Colin Farrell in “Alexander.”) Wearing a honeyed shag that’s probably meant to evoke Jane Fonda in “Klute” but looks like a repurposed mullet, Ms. Bullock enters grinning and squinting and twitching in a pantomime of frenetic adorableness. When the movie opens, her character, Mary Horowitz, a crossword puzzle creator, is living with her parents while her home is being fumigated. Given her social ineptitude and overworked wackiness — her logorrhea, ubiquitous red boots and a pet rodent that appears to be her only friend — it’s a surprise she ever left the parental nest.  The Steve in question is a news cameraman played by the hard-smiling Bradley Cooper, who materializes during an improbable blind date. Smitten at first sight, Mary breaks out the push-up bra and desperation. And because she’s a female character of a certain age in a romantic comedy, she doesn’t just smooch, she also swoons. Oblivious to the sound of Steve’s screeching tires, she gives chase, a decision that takes her from one news hot spot to another and into assorted humiliations. Happily for us, the inert filmmaking comes with some quirky types whose comic faces and timing provide periodic if slight relief: so thank you, Thomas Haden Church, Katy Mixon, D J Qualls, Ken Jeong, Jason Jones and, for an eye blink, Charlyne Yi.  Ms. Bullock tries her best to keep up with these funny men and women, but she’s wrong for her role, and her performance decisions — the tiny lisp, fluttering hands, trudging walk, mincing run — are equally wide of the mark. You can appreciate her wanting to try something different, but Ms. Bullock became a big star because she perfected an appealing type (likable, unsinkable) that seems to align naturally with her off-screen persona. Her characters often start with a few knocks against them and might even be true sad sacks (“While You Were Sleeping”), but the ability to suffer beautifully has long been a prerequisite for female stardom. We wait in exquisite agony for those trembling lips to transform into a dazzling smile.  Mary’s lips, alas, just flap and flap and flap. A brainiac, she rattles off multisyllabic words like a teenager prepping for college admission tests, bombarding her understandably weary, impatient and even panicked listeners with dictionary definitions, encyclopedic notes and foreign-language phrases. The screenplay by Kim Barker (“License to Wed”) tries to insist that Mary isn’t damaged and simply needs to find the right tribe, so she can let her freak flag proudly fly. But the concept of an intelligent woman is apparently so exotic to Ms. Bullock and her director, Phil Traill,  that they frantically kook the character up, as if female smarts were a kind of disability. This being a contemporary big-studio release, I suppose it is.  “All About Steve” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Parents of girls are particularly cautioned.

Sandra Bullock ("The Proposal") and Bradley Cooper ("The Hangover") have both been associated with hit comedies this summer, a thought they should cling to as reviews of "All About Steve" dribble in. Misfiring on every conceivable front, it's that rarest of comedies -- one whose stabs at humor fall painfully flat, while eliciting unintentional giggles every time the film seeks to be serious or deliver a message (which it actually does). Sitting through the pic is an endurance test, but its theatrical durability should be brief.
Although the title riffs on "All About Eve," there's nothing quite so grandiose about the movie, other than a climactic sequence that owes a debt to the 1951 movie "Ace in the Hole," albeit at a deuces-and-treys level.
The one thing people might take away from the movie is that a crossword-puzzle constructor is a "cruciverbalist." Holding that modest occupation is Bullock's Mary Horowitz, who has a "Rain Man"-like grasp for useless information but not much of a social life, living with her parents while scratching out puzzles for a Sacramento newspaper.
Insulted by an elementary school class -- just one example of cruelty that runs throughout the movie -- Mary agrees to go on a blind date with Steve (Cooper), a cameraman for a fictional cable news network. She's instantly smitten, so much so that she devotes an entire puzzle to him (hence the title), costing Mary her job but also freeing her to stalk Steve across the country from one idiotic news story to the next.
At that point, Steve's blowhard correspondent, Hartman (Thomas Haden Church), gets involved, encouraging Mary to continue tailing them, as if Steve's just playing hard to get. She cheerfully obliges, schlepping to Arizona, Oklahoma and Colorado, where the stories include a three-legged baby, a brutal storm and finally a mine shaft cave-in.
Director Phil Traill (who has mostly worked in British TV) and writer Kim Barker (who penned another story of people failing to observe personal boundaries, the equally dismal "License to Wed") appear to have concocted these episodes less to comment on cable news' absurdity than to pad their slim, uncomfortable plot out to feature length.
Yet nothing here adds up, and although Bullock (who also produced) plays Mary as consistently annoying, there's no rationalizing all the abuse heaped her way. Cooper's character proves utterly bland, and Church's take on the unctuous news guy makes you wonder if he'd rather jump back a couple of movies, transform into sand and quietly ooze away.
The audience, meanwhile, will be left to sit with mouths agape as the movie grinds toward its semblance of a conclusion, seeking to convey a "normal is in the eye of the beholder" lesson destined to trigger more guffaws than epiphanies.
Mary's throughout-the-movie narration gushes about the joys of crosswords, and there's a puzzle here, all right. But the only solution comes when two words (six letters) that mean "The movie's over" finally appear onscreen.
