 Put the word "American" in front of almost any noun, and you have a title that trumpets its own self-importance. And when that noun is "gun," and the project is a movie, the title implies an imminent bloodbath. But "American Gun," the debut film of Aric Avelino, who wrote the screenplay with Steven Bagatourian, is nothing like that. A stridently sorrowful polemic against the proliferation of handguns in the United States, it consists of three fictional vignettes, of which only one ends in a shooting death. Preferring to throw up its hands rather than shout itself hoarse, the film sustains a mood of paranoia faintly tinged with hope.  Each story is set in a different part of the country. In an Oregon town, three years after a Columbine-like high school massacre, the community hasn't recovered from the trauma, and its crude attempts to address the tragedy only succeed in rubbing fresh salt in still-open wounds.  At a Chicago high school in a gang-plagued neighborhood, the principal, driven to his wits' end to maintain order, threatens one of his most promising students with expulsion after catching him with a handgun. In the weakest vignette, a troubled Virginia college student  works part time in her grandfather's gun store and develops a fascination with firearms.  If "American Gun" avoids the most obvious kinds of sensationalism, it has the flaw common to many editorial broadsides of overstuffing its episodes with melodrama and symbolism. Its agenda is similar to that of "Crash" but not as fully realized. Nor does it try, like "Crash," to gather its stories into a tightly woven schematic fabric. "Crash" leaves you feeling almost  pummeled; the residue of "American Gun" is a nagging sense of hopelessness.  Video: Movie Minutes Stephen Holden reviews "American Gun," a film featuring three vignettes about the proliferation of handguns in the United States.  In the richest of the three stories, Marcia Gay Harden plays Janet Huttenson, the financially strapped working-class mother of David (Christopher Marquette), the younger brother of one of the two killers in the Oregon massacre. Working two jobs, she had been able to send David to a private school. Now she can no longer afford it, and he faces the unbearable prospect of attending the same public high school as his notorious brother, who shot himself.  Desperate for money, Janet agrees to do a paid interview on local television and finds herself pelted with hostile questions about her responsibility for the shootings. A pariah in her neighborhood, she already lives in an emotional prison of self-doubt made worse by David's hostility toward her. Ms. Harden, bravely refusing to soften her character, fully inhabits Janet, a shrill, overstressed single mother who is as baffled by the tragedy as all those who assume she is the repository of guilty family secrets.  Dwelling in a similar hell, Frank (Tony Goldwyn), the police officer who was the first on the scene of the massacre, is pressured by his bosses to go on television and face a similar interrogation, but his story is too sketchy to have much impact. Examining a community where everyone is looking for a scapegoat, the episode settles on a too convenient one: crass local television.  The Chicago section revolves around Principal Carter (Forest Whitaker), who moved there from Ohio specifically to help inner-city students. But the task is so draining that he has no time left over for his wife (Garcelle Beauvais-Nilon) and young son, and the marriage is strained to the breaking point. After Carter catches one of his best students, Jay (Arlen Escarpeta), with a handgun, the movie leaves him to follow the boy to his job in the cashier's cage at a gas station and convenience store where he needs the gun as protection against robbers. The film's most unsettling image finds Jay cowering in his cage to avoid being shot.  In the most undeveloped story, Mary Ann (Linda Cardellini), a troubled freshman at the University of Virginia, working in the gun shop of her recently widowed grandfather Carl (Donald Sutherland), learns to shoot after witnessing the drugging and near rape of her best friend at a fraternity house.  For all its seriousness, "American Gun" falters on the contradictions at the core of most issue-oriented dramas. The movie's attempt to make a strong statement involves simplifying and ultimately falsifying its characters and situations to score polemical points.  "American Gun" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has violence, strong language and a scene of near rape.

Skittishly paced and dramatically diffuse, "American Gun" misfires in trying to chart the collateral damage and paranoia triggered by the epidemic of gun-related violence in the U.S. Despite flashy use of desaturated color and variegated editing techniques, this debut feature by helmer and co-writer Aric Avelino lacks focus and momentum as it attempts to interweave diverse story strands into a cautionary tapestry. Strong cast may lure homevid aud, but theatrical prospects are low-caliber. 
Pic boasts standout performances by Forest Whitaker as Carter, a Chicago high school principal dealing with the proliferation of guns on campus; and Marcia Gay Harden as Janet, a depressed Oregon mother who remains a local pariah three years after her late teen son's Columbine-style rampage. 
While Janet worries about the future for her surviving son (Christopher Marquette), and one of Carter's brightest students (Arlen Escarpeta) prepares a fake firearm for protection during his graveyard-shift job at a service station, other plots percolate. Frank (well-cast Tony Goldwyn), a cop who responded to the emergency call when Janet's son began firing on fellow students, continues to deal with guilt and rage as locals second-guess his actions during the crisis. Off in Virginia, gun-store owner Carl (Donald Sutherland) finds it difficult to connect with granddaughter Mary Ann (Linda Cardellini), a college student who overcomes her aversion to firearms only after a friend is date-raped.
Sequences involving Harden and Marquette are the film's most interesting, and could have been fleshed out in separate pic. Unfortunately, Avelino chooses to end this plotline with an arbitrarily ironic twist. Other resolutions feel decidedly anti-climactic, forcing one to wonder if the filmmaker was trying a little too hard to avoid the predictable.
Camera (color), Nancy Schreiber; editor, Richard Nord; music, Peter Golub; production designer, Devorah Herbert; set decorator, Traci Spadorcia; sound, Lori Dovi; assistant director, Lou Tocchet. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Contemporary World Cinema), Sept. 12, 2005. Running time: 95 MIN.

 


The first entry in the Crash  subgenre sweepstakes, Aric Avelino 's ambitious dependie follows the Paul Haggis  award magnet's business plan pretty slavishly: Take on a contemporary social crisis (here, gun control) by way of multiple story lines, each illuminating different perspectives on the problem, and each juiced with frustration, melodrama, and mid-level-cast acting fireworks. An angsty breeze in the tradition of old Playhouse 90  issue dramas, Avelino's film occupies three states, but holds its ground best in Oregon, where a Columbine - like massacre still plagues a town several years later. In a structural gambit that's easy to underestimate, the protagonists there are a working-class mother (Marcia Gay Harden ) of one of the dead shooters and his younger brother (a teen–John Cusack –mopey Chris Marquette ), both of whom bristle with mis- placed guilt in a social whorl that considers them somehow responsible. The film's crescendo happens out of nowhere: A passing activist plants a black flag in Harden's lawn, precipitating a spitting word-fight in the street with her brutally accusatory neighbors.
Otherwise, Avelino seems timid about conflict, and not all of his concepts (co-written with Steve Bagatourian ) are eloquent. The other tangents (Linda Cardellini 's Virginian coed getting edgy after a friend is date-raped, Forest Whitaker 's Chicago principal losing his grip on his job) are aimless, seemingly de-ruddered by Avelino's desire to belie story expectations; you're buckling up for an Inspirational Death once promising but streetwise student Arlen Escarpeta  resorts to painting a toy gun black to defend himself, but it's a feint. All of the stories are conceived as ongoing plights, and have no third act. Which would be an improvement on Haggis's hyperbolic civics lesson if Avelino had the chops to master realism and embrace ambivalence. The acting is pro enough to keep your blood up, but the reverb is minimal.
