 “It looks like Vietnam post-napalm.”  That sentence, gravely spoken by a surly, drunken C.I.A. agent (Mark Pellegrino) to his fetching ex-wife  (Gretchen Mol), encapsulates everything that is wrong with the deeply silly movie “An American Affair.”  The agent, Graham Caswell, is referring to the dug-up garden  behind the Washington town house of Catherine, his ex. An abstract painter and sexual free spirit,  Catherine likes to lounge around the house half-naked, smoking cigarettes, seemingly unaware that Adam Stafford (Cameron Bright), the pimply 13-year-old boy from across the way, is ogling her.  A lonely parochial school student whose parents are journalists, Adam is so besotted with his real-life centerfold that he summons the courage to knock on Catherine’s door and ask for work.  She obliges by enlisting his help as a part-time gardener. Before long Adam has turned into a stalker. One night he finds himself peeping through the shutters of her bedroom closet while she has sex.  Catherine is preposterously careless and indiscreet, seeing as one of her regular lovers is President John F. Kennedy, whom Adam spies ducking into the house while a Secret Service detail patrols the entrance. All Washington, including Graham and his sinister C.I.A. boss, Lucian Carver (James Rebhorn), seems to know about the affair.  The movie, directed by William Sten Olsson from a screenplay by Alex Metcalf, is set mostly in the months between the Bay of Pigs fiasco and Kennedy’s assassination. It subscribes wholeheartedly to the history-as-pornography school of thinking, in which all will be revealed if you can figure out who is sleeping with whom, when and where and what they do in bed. Any resemblance between Catherine and Marilyn Monroe  is glaringly intentional.  Because it is crammed with vintage television and film footage of the Kennedy years, “An American Affair” has illusions of itself as a serious docudrama. But as it wades deeper into a conspiratorial swamp that involves angry Cubans, a shadowy C.I.A. plot and Adam’s pilfering of Catherine’s tell-all diary, the movie becomes  a risible fusion of cloak-and-dagger melodrama and prurient coming-of-age story (“Summer of  ’63”?). In the most squirm-inducing scene, the boy and his centerfold, drawn together by grief, actually lock lips.  Were it a farce instead of an earnest, paranoid thriller with pretensions to historicity, “An American Affair” might not seem so offensively exploitative. The fact that it is quite well acted, especially by Ms. Mol, who has the air of a sophisticated 1960s party animal down pat, only compounds the insult.  How far-fetched is it? Take that reference to the backyard garden: in 1963 napalm had long been a weapon of war, but it was not yet synonymous with the American involvement in Vietnam,  then still in the early stages of heating up. “Vietnam post-napalm” was  nearly a decade down the road.  “An American Affair” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations and nudity.

An assassination-conspiracy drama by way of coming-of-age story, "An American Affair" is the offspring of improbable parents ("JFK" and "Summer of '42") and supposes that the Cubans and the CIA were responsible not just for killing a president, but for ruining the illusions of a 13-year-old boy. Yes, it's tough to keep things like world peace and the Cold War in perspective when a young man's hormones are at stake, but thankfully, the late President Kennedy is just a plot device: He won't be found overly distracting by the small audience for this William Sten Olsson-helmed period piece.
"It's all a game of chess, isn't it?" asks slinky Kennedy consort and former CIA wife Catherine Caswell (Gretchen Mol), when confronted by the vile machinations of her ex-husband Graham (Mark Pellegrino) and his chain-smoking agency boss, Lucian Carver (James Rebhorn). Such convenient naivete is the engine of "An American Affair," in which 13-year-old, hormonally challenged Catholic boy Adam Stafford (Cameron Bright) is supposed to be a rube, but could just as well be running the CIA.
When Adam spots his new neighbor, Catherine, naked in her new Georgetown home (has anyone ever written a dissertation on the proximity of beautiful women's windows and the bedrooms of adolescent boys in contemporary cinema?), it encourages Adam to pursue all new interests -- namely, photography, telescopic lenses and gardening.
Despite his supposed teenage reticence, he boldly asks Catherine if she needs any work done, and she sends him to her backyard, where she wants everything uprooted, pots crashed and the dirt overturned. She wants "nothing contained" in her little piece of paradise, which is a big, fat sign to us that she herself feels straitjacketed by her double role as Kennedy's lover and Carver's mole.
Adam attends an integrated school in Washington, where Kennedy is a demi-deity and the usual seventh-grade socialization rituals -- fistfights, romantic standoffs, teenage viciousness -- are all overseen by a nun (Lisa-Lisbeth Finney) who makes a gargoyle at Notre Dame look like Megan Fox. It's all cliche, which means vaguely true, although the '60s Catholic-school setting has been done often, and better (see "Doubt"), than scripter Alex Metcalf does it here, although his perspective does hint at the lingering resentments of a parochial-school graduate. Still, an integrated game of spin-the-bottle at a D.C. teen party in 1963? That needs some explaining.
So does Adam. Bright is supposed to be a tabula rasa of sorts, but does that mean he has to be so devoid of personality? His actions don't make much sense, either: His parents have made clear their feelings about the notorious Catherine -- a known commodity in Washington whose marriage, Kennedy liaison and dead child are all the subject of local gossip. But when Catherine says, "Some things are private," would any love-besotted teenager respond, "Like your son?"
There's a distinct lack of cohesion between what's happening onscreen and Dustin O'Halloran's score, which assigns undue significance to Adam vs. the future of the free world. The Cuban Missile Crisis is a year passed and the assassination is looming, and yet Adam's pubescent crises are given Wagnerian emphasis. Sure, a kid who can eavesdrop on whispered conversations between CIA agents and anti-Castro Cubans (from 30 feet away) deserves consideration. But like many aspects of "An American Affair," the music and the lopsided dramatic priorities take the viewer right out of the movie.
Production values are otherwise fine, especially David Insley's cinematography. But the actors -- notably Noah Wyle and Perrey Reeves as Adam's parents -- mostly look uncomfortable, with the exceptions of Rebhorn, whose Carver reeks of nicotine and corruption, and Mol, acquitting herself admirably even though she's not required to do much besides what she does best, which is look good.


Even the most insatiable JFK-conspiracy-theory freak won't get much juice out of William Sten Olsson 's An American Affair , which subscribes to a pretty tiresome CIA/Cuba scenario (reprisal for failing to assassinate Castro or something). Until the end, all that's window-dressing for the summer of '63 story of one Adam Stafford  (Cameron Bright ), a thoroughly unprepossessing 13-year-old creep. Adam gets into the habit of playing rear window with new neighbor Catherine Caswell  (Gretchen Mol ), who likes to sit topless in her window in between chauffeured assignations with Kennedy. Having played Bettie Page  as an adorably innocent and vacant dominatrix-next-door type, Mol now walks through the part of a blandly free-spirited artist—the kind who tears up her backyard because "form is dead" and goes on acid trips with droning sitar music (in 1963! So ahead of the curve!). You know no good can come of Adam landscaping Catherine's garden, peaking through her windows at night, and getting caught by trenchcoated CIA types who speak ominously of "the Cubans." (Many lines like "Christ! Bobby!" ensue.) Only Noah Wyle , as Adam's unreadable dad, rises above the muck; he deserves his Tarantino-aided resurrection sooner rather than later.
