An artlessly powerful performance by newcomer Nicole Behaire anchors American Violet , an instructive, sturdily built drama based on a true story worth teaching: In 2001, an African-American single mother in Texas is falsely accused of drug-dealing during a housing-project raid. Pressured to plead guilty in a plea bargain by a racist District Attorney (O’Keefe), she chooses instead to file a discrimination suit with support from a northerner ACLU lawyer (Nelson) and a local lawyer (Patton). Here's a case of activist screenwriting where didacticism in the defense of justice is no vice.
See all current movie reviews from EW

 Near the beginning of “American Violet,” when Dee Roberts (Nicole Beharie), a feisty 24-year-old African-American woman, is arrested, handcuffed and roughly dragged by the police from the diner where she works, your heart sinks. We have already watched a police task force conduct a military-style drug raid on Arlington Springs, the housing project in Melody, Tex., where she lives with her mother, Alma (Alfre Woodard), and four children. You grit your teeth in expectation of more cruelty to come.  Thrown into a jail cell with three other women, Dee is stunned to learn she is being charged not for the hundreds of dollars in parking tickets that she owes but with distributing narcotics in a school zone.  Although she is not carrying drugs and none are found in her home, the prosecution claims to have a witness.  Dee’s court-appointed  lawyer urges her to take a plea bargain and agree to a  10-year suspended sentence with a small fine, rather than risk serving a 16- to 25-year prison term. When Dee hotly refuses, even her mother thinks she is a fool.  “American Violet,” which is based on  real events that took place in late 2000, has the quasi-documentary feel of a well-made television drama. Directed by Tim Disney from a screenplay written by its producer, Bill Haney, the film  is beautifully acted by Ms. Beharie,  whose high-strung character is no angel. It is almost impossible for Dee to control her anger, justifiable though it may be. Much of her fury is directed at Darrell Hughes (Xzibit), the father of her two youngest children, with whom she is  waging a bitter custody battle. Making matters worse, he lives next door with a sinister girlfriend who Dee believes is abusing the children when they visit.  The movie’s indictment of injustice and racial profiling in a small Texas town leaves no doubt about who are the good guys and the bad. Dee’s defiance is heroic, as is her concern for the welfare of her children. Also heroic are her minister, Reverend Sanders (Charles S. Dutton), and David Cohen (Tim Blake Nelson), the lawyer from the American Civil Liberties Union enlisted   to defend Dee and sue the district attorney for racial discrimination.  Addressing the congregation, Cohen lays out his interpretation of the local justice system’s oppressive modus vivendi. Drug task forces use military tactics to terrorize black people, he says. Since federal money goes to counties that convict the most people, plea bargains in criminal cases are aggressively pursued. For most people charged with drug-related crimes, the penalties for a conviction after not taking a plea are so frightening that many innocent people plead guilty.  The villain of “American Violet” is the local district attorney, Calvin Beckett, who appears to run the town. Played by Michael O’Keefe as a slicker contemporary version of the hulking, pig-eyed bullies portrayed in earlier films by Rod Steiger and Rip Torn,  Beckett is shrewd enough not to vent his racism publicly, but it still leaks out of him like a bad smell. Navigating between the two sides is Sam Conroy (Will Patton), a local lawyer and former assistant district attorney who has a guilty conscience about past misdeeds.  As Cohen and his assistant, Byron Hill (Malcolm Barrett), build their case, there are no surprises. A more manipulative film would have played up the drama of securing the damning evidence against  Beckett, which is belatedly introduced at his deposition. The movie’s staunchly liberal point of view extends to the 2000  presidential election, which is shown unfolding in the background. Al Gore’s concession speech is used to suggest that the systemic racism in Melody is a symptom of a broader climate of injustice.  “American Violet” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has strong language and racial epithets, and a scene of domestic violence.

The best ad the ACLU has had in a long time, "American Violet" straightforwardly details a true-life story of a fight against institutional racial prejudice that took place in Texas not very long ago. Earnestly presented and well acted, particularly by newcomer Nicole Beharie in the central role, the film shares with many other such agenda-driven dramas a complete lack of narrative surprise, merely connecting the dots between important developments in the case. Pic's inspiring elements lend it some commercial potential, especially with black audiences and school groups, given a distributor expert at getting the word out to the desired public.
The grievances at the heart of the case rightly inspire outrage, and it's the spectacle of overzealous law enforcement, and the punishing effects it has on the innocent who get caught in the large net along with the guilty, that drives Bill Haney's script.
A young, single mother of four living in a depressing small town, Dee Roberts (Beharie) is rounded up with some 30 others when cops raid her all-black housing project. At first suspecting she was nabbed due to her many outstanding parking tickets, Dee is held on drug charges, even though she claims she's never touched the stuff.
Beginning in November 2000, during the protracted Bush-Gore election drama, the story spotlights the many ways in which the legal system was rigged against the accused: Dee is quickly offered a plea bargain and 10 years' probation if she pleads guilty, which, when multiplied by countless other such cases, gives the district attorney strong tough-on-crime credentials.
Despite the advice of her jobless mother, Alma (Alfre Woodard), and the fact that the ornery father of her two youngest daughters, Darrell (Xzibit), is trying to take them back, Dee adamantly refuses to label herself permanently as a felon. She's got plenty going against her in terms of people's prejudices -- she had her first child at 16, and the fathers of her two older kids are both in prison.
To the rescue comes David Cohen (Tim Blake Nelson), a northern ACLU attorney. Arriving spouting statistics about America's huge prison population and how 90% of convicts are in on plea bargains, Cohen is acutely aware of how a "Jewish Yankee" is perceived in these parts. To this end, he engages local attorney and former assistant D.A. Sam Conroy (Will Patton) to join him in fighting Dee's case, which the ACLU has selected because of its overt racial elements and the D.A.'s use of questionable single informants.
Main obstacle is popular crime-busting D.A. Calvin Beckett (Michael O'Keefe), who seems too all-powerful to beat. How it all comes down is inescapably interesting once you're caught up in it, and the resolution is a genuine crowdpleaser. But Haney's script feels like a story outline with dialogue attached, and Tim Disney's direction is all broad strokes, with good guys and bad guys clearly identified and no time wasted on ambiguity or nuances.
That said, Dee is an engaging, admirable lead character, and the striking, petite Beharie, in only her second screen role, is a real winner, bringing energy and fortitude to a woman who easily could have joined the ranks of society's victims and losers. Bright things lie ahead for this charismatic thesp.
O'Keefe makes for a formidable heavy, Nelson is right on the money as the self-aware interloper, Patton gives gentle shadings to a man whose intimate knowledge of Texas ways equips the prosecution with invaluable ammo, Woodard convincingly reps the older, pragmatic way of dealing with the Man, and Malcolm Barrett gets some late moments to shine as Cohen's deputy on the case.
Production values are average, with too-bright lensing giving no drama to the visuals.


A docudrama with a good heart but a heavy hand, American Violet  isn't shrinking. Changing the real names of the people and town involved, the third film by Tim Disney  (Walt's grand-nephew) recounts the true story of Dee (Nicole Beharie ), a young African-American single mother of four living in a Texas housing project, who's erroneously swept up in a drug raid. Her mom (Alfre Woodard ) begs her to plead guilty and avoid prison, but Dee is persuaded by a Yankee ACLU  lawyer (Tim Blake Nelson ) and a local attorney (Will Patton , wearing the worst toupee ever) to sue the bigoted D.A. (Michael O'Keefe ). Mostly solid performances (the great Anthony Mackie  shows up, uncredited, as a mentally ill informant) and admirable attention to detail about legal proceedings forcefully convey Disney  and writer/producer Bill Haney 's outrage over this nation's virulently racist "war" on drugs, though perhaps "The truth shall set you free" need not have been said so frequently. And while it's unclear whether a subplot involving one of Dee's exes (Xzibit ) and his child-molester girlfriend is also fact-based or lifted from the Tyler Perry School of Melodrama , there's no arguing that the truth is always stranger—if not more shamefully appalling—than fiction.
