 The serial killer in “Anamorph” shows promise, even if some of his best moves are derivative. The same is true of the film’s director, H. S. Miller, who, in making his feature debut, conjures up a nightmarish atmosphere of dread that owes obvious debts both to David Lynch (particularly the later work) and to John McNaughton (namely his notorious  horror show, “Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer”). Mr. Miller and his co-writer, Tom Phelan, manage to get under your skin largely with borrowed implements, though they receive solid support from Willem Dafoe and the resourceful veteran cinematographer Fred Murphy.  This is the second serial-killer movie opening in New York City today (see the review of "88 Minutes"), and by far the more accomplished. That’s some consolation, I suppose, though it’s also a drag that filmmakers persist in trolling the same brackish waters. In 1990   Mr. McNaughton shook up audiences with the unnerving “Henry,” a creepy, chilly flick with a lot of skill and no heart (though I do believe you can see one peeping through a victim’s rib cage). Jonathan Demme added Hollywood gloss to the subgenre with “The Silence of the Lambs” (1991), and David Fincher broke from the pack with “Seven” (1995). Last year brought  the release of Mr. Fincher’s masterly “Zodiac,” the definitive serial-killer film.  “Zodiac” may well be the last word on serial-killer films, less because it’s a work of genius than because it directly engages with our obsession — our moviegoing, spectacle-seeking, bloodletting obsession — with serial killers. “Anamorph” is a far more modest endeavor in aesthetic and intellectual terms: It’s self-conscious about its influences without being self-reflexive. Mr. Miller and Mr. Phelan filter their ideas through a more rarefied sieve than most mainstream horror guys — in addition to Mr. Lynch, they borrow from the painter Francis Bacon and throw around art-speak — but they show no interest in adding to the discussion (as it were). They’re more interested in the neat-o ways you can slice and dice a body than in trying to construct meaning from its severed parts.  The character charged with putting the pieces together here is Stan Aubray, a zonked-out New York City detective played by an especially cadaverous-looking Willem Dafoe. With his wild eyes and sharp bones, his parchment-thin skin stretched across his face like a drying animal hide, Mr. Dafoe has always made for an unsettling screen presence. He doesn’t have much to work with in “Anamorph” beyond some laborious bits of business and character tics — Stan guzzles his booze out of little airliner  bottles and owns an antique armchair — but he makes even these trivial moments count. Mostly, he plays Stan without a trace of pity, laying bare a man who seems to have been so hollowed out by his gruesome work that he’s as lifeless as a corpse.  The story is largely irrelevant, as are the other characters. There’s a killer, of course, and eviscerated bodies arranged in tableaus that will either cause you to blanch or dredge up memories from Art History 101. Clea Duvall has a small, predictably thankless part as Stan’s token female friend, a former prostitute (naturally) who only meets him when she’s giving blood, which she does in more ways than one. Scott Speedman plays another detective, though his role is more rightly that of a red herring, while an amusing Peter Stormare shows up as some kind of antiques guru with the investigative insight of Hercule Poirot. Me, I haven’t a clue what Mr. Stormare is doing in this film, but it was nice to see him.  “Anamorph” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Gives new meaning to the  term body art.

This "Seven"-type serial-killer police procedural gives new meaning to the term "high concept." Working backward from an abstract visual idea, an esoteric Renaissance painting technique called "anamorphosis," the filmmakers scramble to build a plot around it. Pic provides the ultimate in subtext with no text: Beyond its cool, reflective surfaces and infinite plays with perspective lies nothing -- character, relationships, motives all seemingly irrelevant. Even Willem Dafoe as a haunted cop cannot ground these artfully grisly optical illusions, unconnected to any comprehensible storyline. Debuting April 18 at Gotham's IFC Center, pic's morbid stylistics may appeal to cable viewers with ADD. 
Pic begins promisingly enough. Sophomore helmer/co-scripter H.S. Miller ("Late Watch"), lenser Fred Murphy and production designer Jackson De Govia have fashioned a New York of vast, old, echoing spaces framed in careful compositions: the dilapidated hull of an old freighter, the cavernous vaulted attic of a cathedral-like building, a deserted carnival funhouse -- even the counter of a small coffee shop seems to stretch miles into the distance.
Willem Dafoe plays a reclusive, obsessive-compulsive cop (fussily arranging and rearranging purchases on the supermarket conveyor belt). Five years previously, it seems, he killed a suspected serial killer known as "Uncle Eddie," who painted the word "Dead" on his artfully posed victims. Promoted to detective, he now teaches the aesthetics of crime scenes to rookies.
A new string of murders, these more gruesome and with more far more esoteric artistic references (one corpse is cut open to form a bloody inkwell for a pentagraph drawing), all specifically refer back to Dafoe's cop, apparently indicating the work of a copycat killer or suggesting that he, in fact, offed the wrong man.
Setups for human interaction between Dafoe, Scott Speedman as a cop rival/sidekick and Clea Duvall as a potential love interest go absolutely nowhere. Miller and tyro co-scripter Tom Phelan have concocted a universe that exists solely in terms of its own aesthetic allusions. Thus, Dafoe's character's sole passion, for antique chairs, allows for a relationship with his supplier, played by the ever-inventive Peter Stormare, who can then pontificate (with slides) on the meaning of anamorphosis: "a technique that uses principles of forced perspective to construct an alternate image within the frontal composition." Or, in the words of Dafoe's character, "it depends on where you stand."
Explicating a photograph by Cartier-Bresson, Dafoe's cop defines art's "decisive moment" as the instant when composition, form and content conspire to reveal some fundamental truth. Miller and Phelan have apparently forgotten the content.


Those nutty cinematic serial killers—always taunting their pursuers with omniscient brilliance, always devising those elaborate crime-scene installations, yet somehow finding time to add that little something extra (death's-head moth larvae, ornate nods to the seven deadly sins, etc.) that means so much to a grumpy forensic investigator. The gimmick here is anamorphosis, the forced-perspective trick by which an image from one angle looks like something completely different from another angle; that means guilt-ridden CSI vet Willem Dafoe , just back from Anton Chigurh 's barber, must decode the grisly tableaux of an artist whose principal media are blood, sharp objects, and eviscerated corpses. Twenty-five years ago, the Dario Argento  of Tenebre  might've socked this style-baiting silliness into the stratosphere, or at least past its eye-rolling contrivances (like the killer's ability to inconspicuously whip up a room-sized camera obscura). Director/co-writer H.S. Miller just lays on the chilly blues and a wet-blanket mood of arty anguish, leaving cinematographer Fred Murphy  and production designer Jackson De Govia  to trump up trompe l'oeils of carefully posed carrion. Any resemblance between these and the real-world practice known as murder—committed for trifling old human motivations like blind anger and money—is strictly coincidental.
