         Writer-director Todd Stephens has said that due to distribution problems with his delightful "Gypsy 83," he wrote "Another Gay Movie" when he was "very angry" — and it shows. He set out to make the raunchiest gay teen movie ever, which this picture most certainly is, but the result is far more frenetic than funny.
 
 "Another Gay Movie" reveals just how difficult it has become to be outrageous (especially in gay comedies), how hard it is to make gross-out humor in either gay or straight pictures work anymore, and how well-nigh impossible it is to spoof, send up or satirize characters who are already caricatures. Stephens, who wrote the landmark gay coming-of-age film "Edge of Seventeen," shovels on and piles up crass sexual humor with more grim determination than inspiration. The irony is that his approach may well pay off with youthful gay male audiences in an undemanding mood, paving the way for an already planned sequel, "Another Another Gay Movie: Gays Gone Wild," a spring break sex comedy set in Fort Lauderdale.
 


         






   Never mind that pals Andy (Michael Carbonaro), Jarod (Jonathan Chase), Griff (Mitch Morris) and Nico (Jonah Blechman) are seniors at a Southern California high school named "San Torum," an amusing reference to the notoriously homophobic senator from Pennsylvania, for they are out and proud. Andy is the good-looking boy-next-door type, and Nico is a flamboyant cinéaste
 with two-tone hair and a lot of makeup. Griff is the class valedictorian, as buff as he is brainy and secretly in love with football star Jarod. Sexual orientation may be a nonissue with these guys, but total sexual experience has eluded them. Therefore, their goal for their summer vacation before starting college in the fall is to correct this situation, thus setting off a series of misadventures.
 
  Along the way Nico has an encounter with "Survivor"-turned-convict Richard Hatch, and a shamefully wasted Lypsinka (John Epperson) appears briefly as Andy's mother. With an aptness that cannot be denied, Stephens got Nancy Sinatra to sing his film's theme song, "Another Gay Sunshine Day."
 
 'Another Gay Movie'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 Times guidelines:
 Raunchy sex humor, some nudity and sex
 
 Distributed by TLA Releasing. Writer-director Todd Stephens. From a story by Tim Kaltenecker and Stephens. Producers Jesse Adams, Karen Jaroneski. Cinematographer Carl Bartels. Editor Jeremy Stulberg. Running time: 1 hour, 32 minutes.
 
 Exclusively at the Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., West Hollywood, (323) 848-3500.   

 “Another Gay Movie” spoofs its way through a parody of teen sex comedies and equally formulaic gay coming-of-age flicks. Senior year at San Torum High School has just ended for all-American Andy (Michael Carbonaro), the jock hottie Jarod (Jonathan Chase), a nerd named Griff (Mitch Morris) and the fiercely flamboyant Nico (Jonah Blechman). Goaded by Muffler (Ashlie Atkinson), a brash lesbian lady killer who throws raucous parties at her fabulous apartment (the “maxi-pad”), the boys make a pact to  experience anal sex before college.  What follows is a rude, rollicking and exceedingly raunchy attempt to turn “American Pie” into “American Quiche.” The writer and director Todd Stephens works from a recipe  that calls for shooting fish in barrels, roasting them over flaming attitude and then garnishing with obscenity, vulgarity and naughty bits. This narrowest of niche movies is as broad as can be, whether the target is mainstream movie tropes (true love under your nose) or subculture types (drug-addled circuit queens, hardcore German bondage freaks).  Certain gags reach the laughing point through brazen bluntness or sheer histrionic determination. Others, like a repellent cameo by Richard Hatch, are merely desperate. Few can be described in a family newspaper.  What pleasure is to be had from the material —  the frank addressing of sexual anxiety and social pressure, a nicely built and frequently undressed cast —  is offset by a worldview that casts the lone African-American character as a libidinous go-go boy and finds it clever to provide subtitles for an Asian cheerleader speaking English. Skewering one status quo while pandering to another, “Another Gay Movie” is exactly what  its title presumes to subvert.

If the "American Pie"-style scene with quiche and a gerbil doesn't get you, than perhaps others featuring scatological S&Mor an exploding electric stimulator will in Todd Stephens' "Another Gay Movie." This is son-of-John-Waters with most of the grossness but none of the essential anarchism -- silly pop trash set for vid-classic status in gay households. Pic looks set for fair theatrical beginning July 28 in Gotham, Los Angeles and Philadelphia before going wide.
Foursome Andy (Michael Carbonaro), Jarod (Jonathan Chase), Nico (Jonah Blechman) and Griff (Mitch Morris) have graduated high school, but are still gay virgins. They decide they absolutely must pop their cherries before college begins in the fall. Put aside their flagrantly gay Russian teacher Mr. Puckov (Graham Norton) and bossy butch pal Muffler (Ashlie Atkinson), and this is a setting and story pointedly close to that of the "American Pie" series.
So, too, is the movie's lumpy bridge of sequences, one jammed into the other, in which the quartet goes about their mission with predictably disastrous results. Andy discovers his dad (Scott Thompson) is only too happy to give him various anal sex toys as a present and that he's bisexual to boot. Jarod begins with a question ("What's a boy gotta do to get some man-snatch?"), attracts a studly softball pitcher, but finds that Griff is actually in love with him. Flamboyant Nico is more into sexual style than, uh, substance, almost beds Richard ("Survivor") Hatch (who is glimpsed in the altogether) and nails a preening sugar daddy.
Scenes largely exist to try to upstage the one before, but one involving Puckov's penchant for harnesses and bodily functions pretty much leaves pic with nowhere to go, and would make even the most grossout moviemakers blush.
This is a universe away from Stephens' modest debut, "Edge of Seventeen," but it remains a suburban middle-class comedy that loves a happy ending. Aficionados may find the pic's various campy outrages hint at the comically disgusting bits in Waters' early movies, but there's nary a political reference in sight.
Production is shiny and stuffed with primary colors that come off best in Chris Anthony Miller's production design.

A blow-by-blow remake of American Pie , albeit with more gerbil sex play, Another Gay Movie  follows four strapping guys from San Torum High School  trying to lose their (anal) cherry. Boasting a Scary Movie  rate of scatalogical jokes-per-minute, it fails to match that franchise's low yield of guffaws. Even with shit, timing is everything, and AGM  jumps from emission to emission with exhausting alacrity. Offering some respite is Scott Thompson  in the Eugene Levy  role. As with its hetero template, the gags slow down for sentiment, and the likable cast is allowed a few moments sans fluids. Jonah Blechman  proves especially game as the Hollywood -obsessed queen with a killer Paul Lynde  impression, but soon he's interrupted by someone getting poked in the eye with a cock.
