Anyone who thinks that Josh Hartnett  isn't a true movie star should see his riveting, high-wire performance in August , a shrewdly dramatized look back at the bursting of the dot-com bubble. As Tom, the hipster CEO of a start-up that's about to crash and burn, Hartnett has a scruffy glamour  worthy of Brad Pitt, as well as a whiplash gift-of-gab intensity all his own. Tom knows he's running on fumes, and the director, Austin Chick, and the screenwriter, Howard A. Rodman, use the summer of 2001 to comment on a culture that is still lethally leveraged. They've made an indie Wall Street   for the Internet era of virtual-profit hucksterism.

 Embracing superficiality in both subject and style, “August” is a low-key drama in high-tech clothing. Set in New York City in August 2001, in the tense climate of a dot-com startup where stock price and corporate morale are plummeting, the movie unspools with an unrelieved cynicism and a metallic aftertaste.  Dancing on cold surfaces requires very sure footing, and Josh Hartnett struggles to maintain his. As Tom, the silver-tongued company co-founder, he inhabits a Hedi Slimane silhouette and an elegantly impersonal loft. A walking sales pitch, Tom repels his kinder, gentler brother and partner (Adam Scott) and prefers expensive toys to women. As with Willy Loman, it’s never clear what he’s selling: his product is as inchoate as his personality.  The dot-com boom and bust is a terrific subject, and “August” has a dark desperation that’s morbidly compelling. But the movie’s amoral momentum is fatally slowed by an acronym-heavy script and flimsy characterizations that offer fine actors — including Rip Torn as Tom’s contemptuous father and Naomie Harris as his missed opportunity — little to play.  All of which makes the 11th-hour appearance of David Bowie, as a ruthless venture capitalist, even more welcome. His final confrontation with Tom is a brutal reminder that old-money influence trumps new-millennium bravado any month of the year.  “August” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has strong language, weak sex and robust greed.

Six years after the lacerating view of twentysomething relationships in his writing-helming debut "XX/YY," helmer Austin Chick makes a less distinctive impression directing scenarist Howard A. Rodman's dot-com-bust tale "August." Starring Josh Hartnett as an Internet hotshot whose startup runs rapidly through overhyped expectations to harsh marketplace reality, this middling drama has no glaring faults, but simply lacks the intended urgency. There's scant sense of surprise in a narrative trajectory that feels preordained. Theatrical reception is likely to be tepid, with better payoff in cable and rental markets.
After a brief montage that establishes the historical moment -- Bush's first swearing-in, Tom and Nicole's split -- we meet Tom Sterling (Hartnett) in spring 2001, cockily enjoying his success at a glitzy Manhattan party for Land Shark.com, the company he co-founded with brother Joshua (Adam Scott). Media hyperventilation has sent the biz's newly public stock through the roof. While designer Josh is the low-key brains of the operation, Tom is the ambitious salesman who's gotten them to this heady point.
"Five Months Later," a title informs us, things look very different. Tom exudes as much arrogant confidence as ever, but Internet startups are going belly-up left and right; Land Shark's stocks are plummeting; its all-paper assets are frozen. Clients impatiently wait for drastically tardy orders while the youthful staff idly sit around. (We never do actually find out what Land Shark does, a deft commentary on how superfluous many Internet boom businesses turned out to be.)
Chief business officers Melanie (Robin Tunney) and Dylan (Andre Royo) are at wit's end getting Tom to acknowledge the depth of the crisis. But he's dangerously unwilling to compromise, let alone admit defeat. He'd rather tap long-suffering Josh for cash to maintain full company control, though Josh has a wife (Emmanuelle Chriqui), new baby and mortgage.
As options shrink, Tom tries to win back ex-girlfriend Sarrah (Naomie Harris), a young architect just back from study in Spain. But the outcome here, as in all Tom's relationships -- be it with Josh or his idealist parents (Rip Torn, Caroline Lagerfelt) -- is predictable. Rodman's original script was called "Silicon Alley," and the NYC locale further robs the story of character. It's not Hartnett's fault that in this context, his designer-scruffy veneer becomes all too reminiscent of prior hollowly victorious but redeemable shark types, particularly those essayed by Tom Cruise (in "Rain Man," "Jerry Mcguire," "Magnolia").
Other perfs are solid enough. David Bowie provides another of his third-act special guest star turns as an old-school tycoon.
Production trappings are slick, from Andrij Parekh's widescreen lensing to Nathan Larson's pulsating electronic score. But the suspense aimed for just doesn't come across.

August  plays out almost entirely in the testing fire of crisis, as the brothers Sterling fight to keep their NYC-based Internet startup afloat. Josh (Adam Scott ) is the visionary designer, a family man and amiable pushover. Tom (Josh Hartnett ) is the company's avatar, a double-donged s.o.b. Lothario and Hindenberg  of egotistic flatus who made his name through gun-slinging sales brinkmanship (given the script's snowstorm of jargon, they might as well be in the widget business). When their once-invincible brainchild is fatally hit in the dot-com bubble's mid-'01 pop, Tom, never inoculated to failure, has to transform himself from a logo, broadcasting corporate brio, into a human. I like Hartnett—an all-American alpha who's taken to prodding the limits of his innate, impassive confidence—and his scenes with a disproving boomer dad (Rip Torn ) crackle, despite the cloddish generation-clash dialogue. But that vitality doesn't carry through. August  seems to be missing something essential—a prologue? Or maybe it's not what's missing that's the problem, but what's here: the personal-crisis-as-photo-op voguing, the laptop-glitch soundtrack accessorizing white-collar despair. Whatever the case, the curtain-call cue for redemptive revelation registers only as a gesture, no more sublime than the slo-mo badass posturing that came before.
