
"August Rush" is the Hollywood version of one of those fawning "60 Minutes" segments about musical prodigies. For most of it, I could hear the congested awe of Morley Safer. TV newsmagazine puffery now has Dickensian aims.
An amazing 11-year-old orphan savant (Freddie Highmore) runs off to New York City from his boys' home and is seized upon by Wizard, a kind of rock 'n' roll-hobo Fagin, whom Robin Williams plays as an overmedicated Bono. Wizard gives the kid a lazy stage name (he sees a truck passing with the words "august" and "rush" on the side) and plops him in Washington Square Park, where August does his big trick: patting an amplified acoustic guitar like a set of bongos. But that's just a sample of what this genius can do.
August can hear symphonies in wheat fields and in urban noise. "I believe in music the way people believe in fairy tales," he says. "Sometimes the world tries to knock it out of you." While August roams the city, Terrence Howard, in the most thankless part he's ever had, plays the social worker searching for him. August doesn't really want to be found. He exists in a state of possessed rapture. The music has called him to New York. It's telling him his parents are still out there. And they are.
The boy is the product of two musicians - an American cellist (Keri Russell) and an Irish rocker (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) - who slept together on a rooftop sofa and never see much of each other again. We know these two are destined for each other because their names are alliterative - Lyla and Louis. But heaven has to wait. Her father (William Sadler) forbids her seeing Louis, who never finds out about her pregnancy but is despondent enough to quit his band. And Lyla is hit by a car. Of course! While she's laid up, Daddy, in a fit of vintage 1940s evil, gives away the baby, telling her it didn't survive the accident.
This would have been fine as juicy-trashy melodrama. But the director, Kirsten Sheridan, and the screenwriters, Nick Castle and James V. Hart, don't want the material to merely entertain us. They don't stop until they've colonized our hearts with their cheese. And I was trying to watch my cholesterol. The film wants to seem guided by cosmic whimsy. Hearing August's subliminal call, Lyla and Louis return to New York a decade later and resume their old lives (she's invited to fill her old Philharmonic slot; he rejoins that wimpy band). The promise of a family reunion is in the offing. But this isn't a matter of fate. It's just desperate moviemaking.
Sheridan helped write 2002's Irish-move-to-Harlem movie "In America," with her filmmaker father, Jim. "August Rush" chugs along with equal shamelessness, eagerly turning the dross of life into the gold of feel-good moviemaking, regardless of how naive or nuts the movie's alchemy seems. One night after August and Wizard get separated, the boy hops off the subway and wanders into a church where a handful of black people are signing the uplift blues ("Mama's gone"; "I'm feeling like a motherless child"; "Don't give up when the pressures come down").
The church is also a shelter, and its spunkiest resident (Jamia Simone Nash) - her name is Hope - shows August how to read music, only to come home and find her practice room covered with the pages of his new symphony. The movie gives us shots of August writing while black kids dribble basketballs and jump double-dutch. That montage is Sheridan's way of integrating this outsider into the fabric of a new world. But since we don't get more than a sample of, say, Hope's singing, that feels like a judgment: They play; he creates. Or his creation is inspired by their play.
Despite everything, Highmore is actually pretty exceptional. He makes such runny foulness as palatable as it can be. Still, there's something amiss about who gets ahead in this movie and how. When August comes along, Wizard demotes Arthur (Leon G. Thomas III), his virtually homeless dreadlocked singer-guitarist, from main attraction to sideshow and helpmeet. And when Hope runs out to tell the minister running the shelter (Mykelti Williamson) what August has done, he doesn't try to find Terrence Howard or a child therapist: he hand-delivers him to Juilliard! Black characters are here to help young August get ahead, eventually even poor Arthur.
If "August Rush" is a fairy tale, it's an excruciatingly, sometimes hilariously oblivious one. Does Sheridan know her movie could weirdly double as a parable for the history of race in music? She gives us a lot of befuddled reaction shots of Arthur, whose bad fortune is the under card to the bombastic triumph. He's probably wondering why he's not starring in a glorified "60 Minutes" segment of his own. That, my boy, is show biz.


Freddie Highmore plays the title role in August Rush , a modern-day Oliver Twist with mystical musical abilities. Robin Williams (yes, I'm afraid so) plays a kind of Manhattan-based Fagin with a touch of Midnight Cowboy to his wardrobe. And ants will play havoc in any cynic's pants as this loopy, goopy fairy tale about a kid looking for his parents oozes to its predictable finish. As August's kin and airy artists themselves, Keri Russell and Jonathan Rhys Meyers cast their eyes to heaven, saintlike, as they pretend to make music.

 To describe “August Rush” as a piece of shameless hokum doesn’t quite do justice to the potentially shock-inducing sugar content of this contemporary fairy tale about a homeless, musically gifted miracle child. August Rush (Freddie Highmore) hears music everywhere. Whether it’s the wind in the grass or the roar of a subway, the sounds of the world are a symphony to his ears, and the movie’s soundtrack offers a Hollywood realization of a John Cage idea in which all sounds are music.  August, introduced as  Evan Taylor, has absolute faith that music will mystically reunite him with his parents, who he is certain must be somewhere out there, although he has no clues to their identity. As we learn early in the movie, those parents —  Louis Connelly (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), an Irish rock singer with a musical sweet tooth, and Lyla Novacek (Keri Russell), a classical cellist —  fell in love at first sight and conceived him on a rooftop overlooking Washington Square but were kept apart by her conniving, ambitious father (William Sadler).  Months after their night of love, the pregnant Lyla is hit by a car and gives birth prematurely. In the most preposterous of the many ludicrous plot twists in a movie whose continuity is flimsy at best, her father forges her signature on adoption papers, gives the baby away, then tells her it died. Louis and Lyla abandon their performing careers and morosely search for they know not what.  In the meantime, Evan flees from a group home in New Jersey to New York City, where he falls in with a band of runaways living in the old Fillmore East Theater in the East Village. Here, Wizard (Robin Williams), the Fagin character in the movie’s “Oliver Twist”-inspired subplot, reigns as their cunning surrogate father who collects and distributes their earnings from panhandling.  When Evan, who has never touched a musical instrument, picks up a guitar for the first time and plays it like a pro, Wizard christens him August Rush, a rock-star-worthy name taken from the side of a truck, and seeing a potential gold mine exploits August for every penny he can earn. After the boy demonstrates the same talent on a church organ, there is no stopping his meteoric ascent. In six months he is conducting a symphony orchestra performance of his original composition on the Great Lawn in Central Park.  The movie, directed by Kirsten Sheridan from a screenplay by Nick Castle and James V. Hart, is acted in a style best described as overawed. Oblivious to persecution and exploitation, Mr. Highmore’s August glides through the movie with a beatific smile on his face. Mr. Rhys Meyers and Ms. Russell, who have no romantic chemistry, wander about in an emotional limbo.  There is a lot of music in “August Rush.” But except for a couple of gospel songs, most of it, including August’s “Rhapsody” (composed by Mark Mancina),  is amorphous, pumped-up schlock.  “August Rush” is rated PG (Parental Guidance suggested). The title character was conceived out of wedlock.

Only auds immune to diabetic rushes should head for "August Rush," though tolerant parents wanting wholesome entertainment for the kids will like it for its repetitive encouragement of creativity. A far cry from the violent doings of helmer Kirsten Sheridan's first effort, "Disco Pigs," pic grafts a stilted Oliver Twist tale onto a story about a boy with miraculous musical abilities trying to connect with parents unaware that he exists. Utterly predictable, but with moments of genuine charm, Warner Bros.' feel-good fantasy should rep a modest Thanksgiving weekend outing (it opens Nov. 21), but avoid sweets the night before.
"Open yourself up to the music around you" is the advice of narrator/protag Evan (Freddie Highmore). An orphan deposited at birth in a New York boys' home, he's been listening to the sounds of the world in the belief that he'll hear his parents' call. Kindly social worker Richard Jeffries (Terrence Howard) suggests it's time the 11-year-old open himself up to the possibility of family placement, but Evan runs away rather than give up his hunt.
Within the retelling, Sheridan jumps back 11 years to the night cellist Lyla (Keri Russell) and rock singer Louis (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) meet while escaping a party off Washington Square Park. The two sleep together but, this being a kids' pic, all they appear to do is spoon, awaking fully clothed. Parents may have some explaining to do when Lyla touches her stomach in a subsequent scene, and is later told, by her career-fixated father (William Sadler), after she's given birth, that the baby has died.
Back in the present, Evan wanders around Manhattan and is befriended by streetwise performer Arthur (Leon G. Thomas III) and taken to a condemned theater, where he lives with a group of ragamuffins in thrall to Wizard (Robin Williams), a brash, swaggering Fagin type. When Evan gets hold of a guitar, he miraculously plays like a master, putting dollar signs into Wizard's eyes as he imagines the lucre he can demand for the prodigy he renames August Rush.
Meanwhile, neither Lyla nor Louis can forget their meeting 11 years earlier. Both end up in New York, while Evan/August escapes Wizard. So close, and yet, will he be reunited with his parents before Wizard steals him away?
Obviously, "August Rush" is not for cynics, or anyone who likes unpredictability. Many of the so-called twists feel strained, though preteens are unlikely to complain, and there's nothing here to really frighten an even younger crowd. Pic's greatest strength is its melding of city noises, from basketball thumps to traffic screeches, into a musical rhythm; while it's not exactly George Gershwin, Sherman and her musical collaborators do a fine job creating almost hummable, if sometimes schmaltzy, tunes.
As pic's focus, Highmore ("Charlie and the Chocolate Factory," "Finding Neverland") has enough charm to carry the bulk of responsibility, and he thankfully underplays the sappy elements -- especially necessary opposite Williams' grandstanding, though in the latter case the blame should be placed more on script and direction. Russell has difficulty transcending her role's blandness, and the chemistry between her and Rhys Meyers doesn't exactly sing.
John Mathieson's lensing has the required sweep and brio, with moments of beauty, such as the opening shot of wheat fields swaying to Evan/August's commands. Corny, for sure, like the drawn-out Central Park concert climax, but the less hard-hearted may get temporarily swept up in the emotions.

Known for his galvanizing park-bench scene in Finding Neverland , in which he redeems a programmatically mawkish denouement with a survivor's practical pugnacity, British child actor Freddie Highmore  beguiles even more in August Rush . Highmore plays the apparently orphaned product of a one-night stand between two musicians (Keri Russell  and Jonathan Rhys Meyers ) who vanished from his life the day he was born. Now August hears a symphony in every sound of New York City, which he's combing for signs of his departed parents. Along with a thuddingly uppercase script by Nick Castle  and James V. Hart , August's heightened sensitivity may be one reason why this Dickensian melodrama feels so overexcited in its first hour. Another is that director Kirsten Sheridan , every stylized inch her father Jim Sheridan 's daughter, treats any change in the emotional or climactic temperature as an occasion for poetic cinema. It's exhausting to watch little August fight his way to freedom and salvation, abetted and hindered by an entertainingly miscast Robin Williams  as a bizarre cross between Fagin and Bono  in orange hair and earrings, who seizes on August's musical talent for his own gain. Acclimate yourself to the frenzied vibe, though, and you'll feel the movie grow into itself as an urban fairy tale whose rapturous finale stakes a wishful claim on the redemptive power of love and art.
