         "The Ballad of Jack & Rose" couldn't be anything but a love story, but it's not one you'll be expecting. Powered by an exceptional performance by Daniel Day-Lewis, this artfully disturbing film is a compelling, imaginative look at the potent emotional bond that forms not between romantic lovers but between fathers and daughters.
 
  As written and directed by Rebecca Miller, "Jack & Rose" is all that and more. Thought-provoking as well as thoughtful, it also deals with the metamorphosis of the counterculture and the death of dreams, with the power of being a young woman and the danger of being an over-reaching alpha male, and with the perils inherent in innocence and the parallel risks lodged in being sure you're right.
 


         






    While many young directors, too many to lament by name, delight in repeating themselves, Miller has expanded her territory and widened her range with each of her films. The Sundance Grand Jury Prize-winning "Personal Velocity" was an improvement over her debut "Angela," and "Jack & Rose" is her best work yet. In a world where independent ventures can be as monotonous as studio sequels, it's heartening to see a filmmaker willing to deal with situations and issues that stray from the norm.
 
  It's especially satisfying in this case because Miller has managed the difficult feat of taking a theme informed by her experience and beautifully universalizing it. Miller is the child of playwright Arthur Miller, so the notion of a daughter coming to terms with a powerful, charismatic father could not have been unfamiliar territory. "I'm certain that there's some reflections of my own life," she said at Sundance, "but as the writer you're the worst person to be able to tell." At the same time, she has used her knowledge not to narrow but to deepen her story's implications.
 
  Before we meet Jack or Rose, we experience their house, a shambling utopian structure with a character of its own. Beautifully sited on an unnamed East Coast island (shooting by the sterling Ellen Kuras took place on Canada's Prince Edward Island), the house was once the centerpiece of a thriving commune, now, in 1986, abandoned. Except for Jack and Rose.
 
  It is one of the deft, understated accomplishments of Miller's film that when we do meet Jack and Rose, they are so enamored of each other in a playful, bantering way, we can't immediately tell if their relationship is romantic or familial. Inhabiting a bucolic Eden before the fall, they live so much by their own rules they're not aware anymore that that's what they're doing.
 
  Jack the father is an unrepentant, charismatic counter-culturalist who's aging just like his house, someone who retains his penchant for hand-rolled cigarettes and his passion for environmental concerns even though his fellow communards have abandoned him.
 
  It was Jack's trust-fund money that bought the land, and he is still serious about rebuilding society on a small scale, about finding a way to live "without destroying the planet." Now, with his health worsening, his enemy has the specific face of developer Marty Rance (the always welcome Beau Bridges), who thinks encroaching on wetlands is a small price to pay for some spiffy new homes.
 
  Daughter Rose, the classic pre-Raphaelite child-woman of 16, sounds like a standard-issue character. But as written by Miller and acted by 17-year-old veteran Camilla Belle, she is very much her own person. Intellectually sophisticated but sheltered emotionally, she soon puts us in mind of Jack's description of her mother: "dreamy, capricious, inscrutable."
 
  Even in these preliminary stages, Miller pays attention to the texture of this relationship, takes the time to immerse viewers in the characters and their lifestyle. Details like her choice of music for the soundtrack, from Creedence Clearwater Revival's version of "I Put a Spell on You" to Leo Kottke, John Mayall and Bob Dylan's "Lay Lady Lay," exactly capture the ambience she wants to create.
 
  Very much a law unto himself, someone who is used to following his own inclinations, even if it means shooting at men working on those model homes, Jack sets things in motion when, with characteristic impulsiveness, he decides to bring his mainland girlfriend Kathleen (Catherine Keener) to live with him on the island. "It's an experiment, a new chapter," he tells Rose, not knowing just how much truth he's speaking.
 
  For Kathleen doesn't come alone, she brings her teenage sons Thaddius (Paul Dano) and Rodney (Ryan McDonald) and all their attendant psychodramas and neuroses to the island with her. The boys are disgusted by the place's remoteness, calling it "Retro World," while Rose, blindsided by the sudden change, turns into a different person almost overnight. When Jack rails against the world's ecological callousness by saying "we do whatever we want and turn a blind eye to the consequences," he is unknowingly commenting on his own emotional obtuseness as well.
 
  Miller is a former actress, and one of her gifts as a director is the ability to bring out the best aspects of her performers. Keener, adept at seeing the dark humor in a variety of characters, convincingly plays Kathleen with an urgent seriousness she has not displayed before. And Bridges adroitly brings an unforeseen humanity to what could have been a conventionally villainous portrayal.
 
  Best of all is Day-Lewis, who is married to Miller and as an actor is incapable of taking a role without throwing himself into it with total commitment, which in this case included helping to build the house Jack and Rose live in.
 
  Day-Lewis brings Jack alive in all his contradictions and complexities, inhabiting the role completely with a performance that gets progressively deeper and more moving as the film unfolds.
 
  Combining an actor you can't take your eyes off with unapologetically emotional material makes "The Ballad of Jack & Rose" a model of artistic, provocative American filmmaking.
 
 'The Ballad of Jack & Rose'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, sexual content and some drug material
 
 Times guidelines:
 Adult subject matter, scenes of intense and at times painful sexuality
 
 Daniel Day-Lewis
...Jack Slavin
 
 Camilla Belle
...Rose Slavin
 
 Catherine Keener
...Kathleen
 
 Paul Dano
...Thaddius
 
 Ryan McDonald
...Rodney
 
 Jena Malone
...Red Berry
 
 Beau Bridges
...Marty Rance
 
 An IFC Films production. Writer-director Rebecca Miller. Producer Lemore Syvan. Executive producers Jonathan Sehring, Caroline Kaplan, Graham King. Director of photography Ellen Kuras. Editor Sabine Hoffman. Costume designer Jennifer von Mayrhauser. Production designer Mark Ricker. Art director/Construction coordinator Pierre Rovira. Running time: 1 hour, 51 minutes. At the ArcLight, 6360 Sunset Blvd., Hollywood, (323) 464-4226; and Laemmle's Monica 4-Plex, 1332 2nd St., Santa Monica, (310) 394-9741.   

They could be Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, clothed but innocent nonetheless, lying peaceably on their backs surrounded by wild greenery and looking up at wild blueness — that's how complete, contained, and contented a couple the unknown man and woman appear to be in the opening moments of Rebecca Miller's artistically and personally mature drama The Ballad of Jack & Rose . The sinewy, graying man with the ripe Scottish accent, we learn, is Jack (Daniel Day-Lewis); the younger woman is Rose (Camilla Belle from Practical Magic ), and the two relate to one another with the rightness of nestling cups. That their relationship isn't immediately clear — it turns out the two are chaste  father and daughter, not lovers — is part of this ballad's mournful melody. Miller's theme is innocence, the loss of it, and the reclamation of equanimity in the face of that loss, and the music she makes is haunting.
The filmmaker sets her dyad in a patch of unspoiled country on an unnamed East Coast island, the remains of a commune in which Jack is now the sole caretaker of an all-but-dead ideal; a slick land developer (Beau Bridges) has already begun building on the edge of Jack's property. Indeed, Jack is dying too, of a bad heart, and he's angry about the world he cannot put in order; he also feels helpless about the beloved daughter who will soon be parentless.
Rose's welfare is as much a consideration as his own domestic companionship when Jack invites Kathleen (Catherine Keener, conveying a whole, complex woman in just a few scenes), his casual girlfriend on the mainland, and her two sons (Ryan McDonald and Paul Dano) to move in. But Rose is not pleased to share her world with anyone new.  Jack's little girl is becoming a woman — competitive, possessive, potent, arousing and arousable. And she lashes out at her noncommune — and particularly at the adult woman now in her father's bed — in a sequence of chaos-inducing maneuvers that also happen to be perfectly chosen: A venomous snake intentionally set loose is about as boldly symbol-laden a gesture as a storyteller can make, and Miller takes confident, authoritative charge of the mythological, biblical, and sexual implications. She also displays a keen understanding of the intersection between teenage lust and fear.
As in Miller's two previous films, Personal Velocity  and Angela , The Ballad of Jack & Rose  is as much a conjuring of moods and textures as it is of moving characters. Miller's directorial eye favors a kind of singsongy wandering from notion to notion, with plenty of time to literally pause and smell the flowers — rhythms that both Day-Lewis and Belle respond to as if breathing in unison. (The excellent cinematographer Ellen Kuras has worked on all three of Miller's pictures.) Of course, as the filmmaker's husband, Day-Lewis may be especially attuned to his wife's respirational style — besides, he has a rare talent for creating a character from the breath out — but it's worth admiring how his Jack is a man built out of an  exceptionally delicate network of life's gains and losses, and how each tendril is visible in this lovely performance. For a teenage actress, on the other hand, Camilla Belle's gift for playing a young woman of similar age with such control of the elements of uncontrollable young womanhood, so to speak, is a marvel.

he Jack of all trades in the new film "The Ballad of Jack and Rose," played by the brilliant actor Daniel Day-Lewis, is no ordinary man. A proud survivor of the 1960's and its utopian promise, Jack lives alone on an island with his only daughter, Rose (Camilla Belle), a doe-eyed beauty with the milky skin and ruby lips of a fairy-tale heroine. Shrunk to near-skeletal size, his bones poking right angles through his clothes, Jack suffers from two heart conditions. One will soon put him six feet under. But before that, the other may send the terminal outsider and his daughter down the path of disaster, though one shaped more by the tao of Oprah and Dr. Phil than the tragedy of Lear and Cordelia. The film opens in 1986 with the image of richly hued red flowers seemingly bopping to the music flooding the soundtrack, Screamin'  Jay Hawkins's singularly creepy song, "I Put a Spell on You." This first version is by Creedence Clearwater Revival and is all growls and lugubriously plodding beats. Sometime later, after Jack and Rose are on the emotional outs and neck-deep in melodrama, we hear the song again, only this time the voice prowling the soundtrack belongs to Nina Simone, a singer whose unhurried phrasing and heat bring the song to a slow boil. By this point in the story, Jack has invited a woman, his sometimes lover, Kathleen (Catherine Keener), to move in with him, an invitation that sends his daughter reeling. A story about the limits of love, "The Ballad of Jack and Rose" is also about the limits of idealism. Written and directed by Rebecca Miller, the wife of Mr. Day-Lewis and a daughter of Arthur Miller, the film summons up both a time and a worldview as distant as the Port Huron Statement, a founding document of the New Left. Once upon a time, Jack and some like-minded souls, including Rose's long-gone mother, hoped to live in communion with one another and with the natural world. The second goal turned out to be easier than the first and, over time, the other commune members drifted back into the outside world. These days, Jack alone lights the house with windmill power while Rose collects seaweed to use as fertilizer in the garden. Bathed in gauzy light (the great cinematographer Ellen Kuras is behind the camera), Jack and Rose make a handsome if unsettling couple for reasons that become apparent shortly after the film begins. At first, it's hard to pinpoint what is amiss. There is something faintly off about how steadily Rose fixes her father in her gaze, a look that seems to come from years of adoration rather than anxiety about his health. And there is something peculiar, too, about their harmonious isolation. It isn't just that the two have shut out the world; it's that the world has abandoned them. Across the island, a developer (Beau Bridges) has built homes, incurring Jack's wrath. But outside of this interloper, the daily grind - the world of bummer National Public Radio broadcasts, of government busybodies and trash-littered shores - is mostly absent. Jack's sickness forces an unwelcome dose of reality into this charmed scene. He invites Kathleen to take up residence with them, ostensibly so she can play mother to him and his daughter. An opportunist in tight jeans, Kathleen has two teenage sons (by two different men), the scowling Thaddius (Paul Dano), a boy with a face like a blade, and the neurasthenic Rodney (Ryan McDonald), whose padded body suggests a cozy refuge. When this family of three moves into Jack and Rose's house, they bring a load of baggage (teenage hormones, salted wounds) and, in time, a castaway in search of a berth, played by an excellent Jena Malone. These interlopers leave sticky fingerprints all over paradise. Too bad they don't blow it to smithereens. Love is strange, and some love, like that between Jack and Rose, is stranger still. But in "The Ballad of Jack and Rose," it's also unbelievable because Ms. Miller is too smitten with the idea of this impossible love to make her characters ring true. The full measure of Jack's wrongs, what his convictions have done to his daughter and how they have shaped their life together, doesn't emerge until late in the film. But even then it remains unclear whether Ms. Miller fully appreciates just how loathsome a creature Jack is, the damage he's wrought. The filmmaker wants Jack to be a sacred monster, but sacred monsters are the stuff of myth, of fairy tales and of ballads. Ms. Miller wants to have her mythopoetic conceit and her hurting, feeling flesh-and-blood people, too; in the end, she has neither. Painfully thin, Mr. Day-Lewis lost a considerable amount of weight for the role and has the caved-in look of a man hollowed out by disease or disappointment, maybe both. Even in such diminished form, though, the actor overwhelms the screen, which poses a problem not only for his female co-stars, neither of whom has enough to work with, but also for his director. "The Ballad of Jack and Rose" is the third feature from the restlessly ambitious Ms. Miller, whose earlier films were "Angela" and "Personal Velocity." With this one, Ms. Miller has attempted to elevate a small Oedipal story about two damaged souls into a grandiloquent epic, Shakespeare by way of Bob Dylan. She misses by a significantly wide mark, largely because she loves her monster too much and his victim too little. "The Ballad of Jack and Rose" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has some disturbing violence, drug use, strong adult themes and language.

What does it mean to give a wholly convincing performance from an untenable script? Does the feat confirm the supremacy of the living word over the frozen text? Or is the acting merely earnest salesmanship of shoddy merchandise? It's an inquiry that might especially interest Daniel Day-Lewis , whose famously immersive process surpasses the artistic and enters the realm of the metabolic. As the dying hippie farmer in wife Rebecca Miller 's The Ballad of Jack & Rose , Day-Lewis—an ambling scarecrow under boater and musty cloth coat—is as rooted as an oak in his character and milieu, yet easefully disengaged from the film's pensive histrionics. His turn as lifestyle extremist Jack carries an authentic scent of tobacco and peat while much of the movie smells of the lamp.
Scotsman Jack is a trained engineer with a big inheritance whose uncompromising environmental principles have led him from communal living in the '60s and '70s to proud isolation by the film's present day of 1986. He and his 16-year-old daughter, Rose (Camilla Belle ), play Adam and Eve on an unidentified "island off the East Coast" of North America (lovingly captured in the redoubtable Ellen Kuras 's agile, sun-burnished cinematography). Cuddling in bed and gazing into each other's eyes, the adoring father and daughter produce a discomfiting sexual frisson. His days numbered by a coronary ailment, Jack hastens the Fall by paying his semi-girlfriend, Kathleen (Catherine Keener ), to move into his earth-covered, energy-efficient house with her pair of reluctant teenage sons. Rudely displaced as crypto-wife and caretaker, and profoundly unsocialized to boot, Rose effects her confused revenge: She launches twin seduction attacks on Kathleen's boys and even fires a rifle in the newly domesticated couple's bedroom. She gets it from her father: Jack uses a gun to scatter construction workers building new model homes on nearby de-protected wetlands.
As Jack's waning heart beats out the last faint pulses of a lost cause, writer-director Miller delivers a frankly unnecessary critical autopsy of failed nature-child ideals (I know environmentalism is dead, I heard it on NPR  a few weeks ago). Rose's petulant theatrics don't bespeak the perils of boundary-free parenting so much as a mental disorder, or a coarse screenplay. One of Kathleen's sons explains all: "Innocent people are just, uh, dangerous, I guess." But not too dangerous: This Ballad  strikes a final note of prosaic humility, even if Miller all along has been promising The Wreck of the Hesperus  with a Dylan score.
