 In 1929 Serge Diaghilev, whose name is pretty much synonymous with ballet impresario, died in Venice. His passing left a void not only at his famed company, the Ballets Russes, but also in the larger world of dance. The companies that tried to fill that void - and that spread midcentury balletomania to Australia, South America and the United States - are the subject of "Ballets Russes," a graceful and fascinating new documentary by Dan Geller and Dayna Goldfine.  Like New York City pizzerias, the successor organizations laid claim to their predecessor's august and commercially potent name: the first, run by the dancer and choreographer Leonide Massine, was known as the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. The second, overseen by Col. Wassily de Basil, called itself the Original Ballet Russe. They also competed for the allegiances of dancers and audiences, a struggle that gives this film's historical narrative an air of show business intrigue.  And "Ballets Russes" does tell a marvelous story of midcentury show business, encompassing both the most exalted expressions of pure art and the sometimes grubby commerce that sustained it. The filmmakers, who spent years gathering rare clips and artifacts, triumphantly demonstrate the almost magical power of archival documentary. Dance is, axiomatically, the most ephemeral of art forms, expiring the moment it comes into being. But here it achieves at least a virtual immortality, as the remarkable accomplishments of dancers, choreographers, and costume and set designers come alive, briefly and sometimes blurrily, on the screen.  But the real life force pulsing through "Ballets Russes" - what makes it a delight even for a dance philistine like this  critic - belongs to the veterans of the two companies. Many of these dancers were well into their 80's when they were interviewed for the movie, and several have since died, but they remained spirited and active to the end. (Many still teach dance, and a few still dance onstage.)  They speak in a variety of accents, Old  World and New. The cadences of old Russia can be heard in the voice of Nathalie Krassovska, who manages to be regal and earthy. The Russianness of the ballets is also affirmed by two of the Monte Carlo company's famous "baby ballerinas," Tatiana Riabouchinska and Irina Baronova. Recruited by Massine and George Balanchine in their early teens, the babies (Tamara Tourmanova was the third) created a new ideal of slender, delicate femininity for ballerinas.  Hearing them reminisce, you can  infer that their lives were not always easy, but toughness and resiliency are as much a part of their artistic identities as delicacy and grace. Of course, not all of the dancers are women, and not all are Russian. Frederic Franklin, an Englishman who was one of Massine's principal dancers, is one of the major figures here, as is Maria Tallchief, one of five American Indian dancers recruited into the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo and later prima ballerina at Balanchine's New York City Ballet.  Balanchine himself casts an interesting shadow over "Ballets Russes," appearing variously as protégé, collaborator and rival. Mostly, though, the film is concerned with de Basil and Massine's companies, which contended with war, each other and the caprices of backers, critics and audiences. There is something undeniably bittersweet in this chronicle of their various rises and falls. Mr. Geller and Ms. Goldfine, in putting together this impeccable memorial to a perishable art form, have also composed a moving, invigorating elegy to the civilization that sustained it.
The documentary Ballets Russes  enacts its drama with a light editorial hand and unavoidable sentimentality, rather like a roll call of the NBA's "50 Greatest Players." The filmmakers, who claim only a prior "curiosity" about dance (despite a 1988 doc on Isadora Duncan ), take on the Ballets Russes post-Diaghilev, whose 1929 death led to rival companies, the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo  and the Original Ballet Russe, and aesthetic headhunting between them. The film tips slightly toward the first, which seems to have got most of the personality and less of the mismanagement. Cultural solemnity—the war, Klansmen  climbing onstage in Montgomery  and demanding the "nigger" (Raven Wilkinson, the first black dancer in a major company)—isn't elided, but sits too aloofly in a film with mostly unproblematic things to say. Yet Ballets Russes  understands its own lost moment: Léonide Massine 's Les Présages , radical in 1933 as the first symphonic ballet, was one of the "great erotic pleasures of the London summer" (in Marian Seldes 's voiceover). There was even a Yoko Ono  of sorts: Nina Novak , a lesser dancer and lover of director Sergei Denham , who gave her the best roles; this era coincided with cost cutting and a 1957 premature curtain drop to get around paying the orchestra overtime. She appears in the archival footage and in a present-day interview, but Ballets Russes  is too responsible, and too sweet, to ask for a scapegoat
