A slew of computer-animated films about talking animals hit theatres this year, and like clockwork, every one featured a wacky, smart-aleck sidekick for comic relief. The latest addition to the genre, Barnyard
, offers a slight but unwelcome variation on the tradition by casting this character as the protagonist. Voiced by Kevin James (King of Queens)
, Otis the teenage cow wisecracks and parties his way through life on a farm where animals live like humans and male cows have udders. Apparently, cows occupy the ruling class of the barnyard hierarchy, and Otis is set to inherit leadership from his father. Content to surf on hills and throw barn parties, Otis shrugs off his destiny along with his father's patient lectures about responsibility. But rebellious children take heed: Otis' father dies at the hands of murderous coyotes soon after his son ignores the elder cow's wisdom and goes off to party. The tragedy leaves the guilt-ridden Otis alone to shoulder his newfound responsibility and confront the murderous coyotes. That is, with the help of his zany barnyard friends and some flashbacks of his dad. Why writer/director Steve Oedekerk decided to remake The Lion King
 with CGI farm animals is up for debate, but it certainly wasn't for aesthetic reasons; the animation looks shoddy and flat compared even to modern video games. The film's humor feels equally dated. Most of the sight gags and extended jokes about humans' ill-informed notions of the animal world are lifted from Toy Story
, then changed up a bit to suit the farm setting. Occasionally, the film reaches the sly, adult-oriented humor of Pixar fare, especially when the characters muse about their inevitable fate as farm animals. Mostly though, it's strictly for kids, and, as the three or four people who saw Oedekerk's previous directing effort, Kung Pow: Enter the Fist
 (sadly, my hand is raised), can attest, the writer/director tends to stretch even throwaway jokes minutes past the punch line. In all fairness, Barnyard
 has far more wit (and certainly fewer fart jokes) than the misguided kung-fu parody, and its message about accepting responsibility and helping others comes through with sincerity and precious little sarcasm. By the end of the film, a less-obnoxious Otis learns that a little maturity and altruism go a long way. It's a fine message, but, in the case of the film itself, a little originality would have gone even further.


Speaking as both a parent and a critic, I do believe I'd rather drive rusty railroad spikes through my eyes than have to sit through one more computer generated family film about talking animals. The bad news for Hollywood is that after seeing ``Barnyard" my kids feel the same way.
Written and directed by Steve Oedekerk, the comic mind behind ``Bruce Almighty" and ``Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius," ``Barnyard" is nothing so much as ``The Lion King" chewed in a cud and digitally regurgitated. It's manic and maudlin, borderline creepy, occasionally inspired. More often, it's just plain strange
: with the brief appearance of a character named Wild Mike, a sort of break-dancing Tasmanian Devil the other farm animals keep imprisoned in a box, my daughters and I looked at each other in the dark with alarm. What fresh CGI hell is
 this?
The story concerns the coming of age of Simba -- excuse me, Otis (voice of Kevin James), an irresponsible young cow whose father, Ben (Sam Elliott), is the august leader of the barnyard. Ben holds the barnyard morning meetings, keeps watch at night against coyotes, and dispenses homilies like ``A strong man stands up for himself. A stronger man stands up for others."
Otis is having too much fun being a party animal to pay attention until the unthinkable happens and he has to step up to the plate. Can crippling guilt and the love of a pregnant heifer named Nala -- sorry, Daisy
 (Courteney Cox) -- overcome his urge to go human-tipping with a crew of ``Sopranos"-accented Jersey cows?
I'm not making this up; I don't think I could without drinking a punch-bowl of Ritalin mixed with cough syrup. ``Barnyard" gives us a shiny, rather ugly world of humanoid beasties; it's as if a bunch of Little Tykes toys had been given life and stroppy attitudes. There are humans here, but they're grotesque and few, and the gag is that the animals have to hide from them their ability to use cellphones and drive cars. You may be willing to suspend your disbelief to buy that, but you'll probably stop short at the movie's extremely odd notion that male cows have udders.
That's right: udders. Did no one involved with this movie bother to Google the word ``bull"? Have we in fact wandered onto a top-secret genetic research station? (That would explain the rapping rat and the giant mutant chick.) Sure, it's a family film and no one wants to spoil the party with details, but I say give the kiddies the straight anatomical dope, more or less, so they won't be in for a terrible surprise when they wander into a field with a milk pail some day.
``Barnyard" is not without its laughs. The cast is enthusiastic, the musical numbers bizarrely catchy, and Oedekerk keeps throwing animals at us: the farm dog (Dom Irrera) addicted to fetching balls, a wimpy rooster (Rob Paulsen), a drooling coyote (David Koechner), a neurotic ferret or fox or something (Cam Clarke). Danny Glover voices the wise old mule who might as well be named Rafiki; he's fine, and Jeffrey Garcia as a smart-aleck Hispanic field mouse is the funniest thing in the movie.
By contrast, Wanda Sykes's sassy-black-chick schtick -- she plays Daisy's friend, Bessy -- is way past its freshness date, and so, really, is the whole racial profiling of CGI family flicks. Every vibrant cultural movement eventually descends into rococo excess, and with ``Barnyard," computer-generated cartoons have at last arrived at their moment. The film ends with a bovine nativity scene that would delight the camp artist Jeff Koons, but this is a studio film so it's played insanely straight. A strong man might weep. A stronger man might rent ``Babe" instead.


         I understand that realism is not the main goal in an animated movie about anthropomorphized farm animals, but, seriously, what's with the male cows in "Barnyard"? Did the bovine gender confusion at the heart of the story give no one pause at Paramount or Nickelodeon? Did the drawbacks of featuring a female lead so outweigh the benefits of cow protagonism that a mass species sex-change was required in order for the project to go forward? Are hornless, uddered boy-cows the next big thing in aggressively marketed, reality-displacing fallacies, like Snackwells and intelligent design?
 
  I don't pretend to know all the answers; all I can say for sure is that in writer-director Steve Oedekerk's bizarre computer-animated universe, "female cows" are required to wear hair accessories in order to differentiate themselves from "male cows," with whom they unaccountably share secondary sex characteristics. Otis the cow (voiced by Kevin James), his alpha cow dad, Ben (Sam Elliott), and the thuggish band of Jersey cows Otis teams up with toward the end of the movie are all in unfortunate possession of protuberant udders that look like rubber toilet plungers with four wobbly cocktail weenies attached. The image would be plenty disturbing enough if the characters didn't compound the shock by going about on hind legs and engaging in lots of bouncy physical activity. Reader, there were times when I felt compelled to avert my eyes and pray for pants.
 


         






    The crassness of the image, which we can assume was entirely unintentional, pales in comparison to the sad vulgarity of its characters and story. Pretty much all you need to know about "Barnyard" is summed up in its subtitle, "The Original Party Animals," and in its tagline, "What happens in the barn, stays in the barn" — a formulation you'll no doubt recognize from the city of  Las Vegas
' corporate-sanctioned debauchery consumer brand campaign. The movie opens on a bucolic farmyard dotted with cute country animals. The look is appealingly old-fashioned at first, luridly colorful and surreally deep, as though looked at through a View-Master. But as soon as the farmer goes off in his truck, the animals stand up and start acting like idiots. The premise is that when humans turn their backs animals revert to living lives very much like our own — that is, they exist in a state of protracted, excitement-addled, media-saturated arrested development. That's right, kids, when the farmer's away, the moo-cows and oink-oinks come out to play like frat boys on the Strip. Whoo! Party!
 
  There is one grown-up on the farm, namely Ben, an aggrieved manager type who is forever trying to round up the other animals into meetings. That's just what leaders do. If Ben is all officiousness all the time, his son Otis is a Mountain Dew commercial made beef. When we first see Otis, he's surfing down a nearby mountain on a board strapped to an ice cube. Whenever we see him after that, he's golfing, parasailing, strapping on one of those funny hats that double as drink holders and watching sports on TV. When he finally shows up at Ben's meeting, he's covered in feathers. He greets the assembled animals with an insouciant "wassup" and takes a call from the underground gopher network confirming the arrival of his gray market Air Jordans. Childhood memories to cherish forever.
 
  Not long into the film, Ben is attacked by a band of villainous coyotes, really scruffy sickos of the type favored by CBS police procedurals. But when the other animals ask Otis to assume Ben's leadership responsibilities (although what they need leadership for, considering their only cultural imperative is to party, is unclear), Otis refuses and instead spends his time hanging around with his feckless Mexican mouse friend, ignoring the down-home wisdom of the Morgan Freeman character (an old mule voiced by Danny Glover), falling in love with the sweet, docile, cow-eyed Daisy (Courteney Cox) and braving the sassy put-downs of her brown cow friend, Betsy (Wanda Sykes), who is described in the production notes as a cow with "a no-nonsense 'tude" who "tells it like it is" and hides a "big heart" beneath her "tough exterior."
 
  Surely there's no better way to introduce kids to the joys of knee-jerk stereotyping than to randomly distribute clichés among talking livestock. What's not obvious is how well the frat house humor in "Barnyard" will track with the under-10 set. The movie alternates between terrible, punny jokes — installing a "mechanical man" ride in the bar, making a dartboard out of Col. Sanders' face — grown-up references and random action sequences that have no connection to one another.
 
  It's always dispiriting to see children's movies succumb to desperate pandering to the coolness imperative, especially since, given the marketing muscle they tend to have behind them, the bigger trick seems to be in getting people not to see them. Even when the aboveboard message is ostensibly positive — here it's that irresponsibility is bad, growing up is necessary and, no matter how cool you are, shirking your responsibilities could have tragic consequences — it's drowned out by rowdy celebrations of the worst things the culture has to offer. After a second vicious coyote raid on the henhouse stirs his inner action hero ("Put. The chick. Down."), Otis remains kind of a jerk who swaps sports for commando delinquency and payback. Offended by a group of boys from a nearby subdivision who go out at night and tip cows for fun, Otis and the Jersey cows steal a nearby farmer's car, crack open the milk bottles and nearly kill themselves trying to evade the cops while shouting "Milk me! Milk me!" In other words, "Barnyard" may be excellent preparation for future "Porky's" appreciation, but otherwise it's just another example of middle-aged coolness-anxiety disguised as kid's entertainment. How cool is that?
 
 'Barnyard'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some rude humor and mild peril
 
 A Paramount Pictures/Nickelodeon Movies release. Writer-director Steve Oedekerk. Producers Oedekerk, Paul Marshal. Editors Billy Weber, Paul D. Calder. Music by John Debney.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 30 minutes.
 
 In general release.   

In Barnyard , an animated-animals movie from Nickelodeon, Otis (voiced by Kevin James) is the goofy cow, round and shiny and tricolor like a walking Neapolitan ice cream bar. When the farmer's away, he and his critter buds throw jamborees in the barn and go surfing down a cliff atop a block of ice. This is when the 'toon's at its jolliest. At other times, as coyotes lurk nearby and Otis (at the behest of his gray-cow dad) sluggishly learns how to be a ''strong man,'' it feels like Barnyard  swipes too much of its plot from The Lion King .


With a blithe disregard for anatomical correctness, "Barnyard" offers the spectacle of male cows equipped with prominent udders while spinning an uplifting coming-of-age yarn spiked with liberal doses of madcap lunacy. Steve Oedekerk's raucously funny yet warmly sentimental CG toon may perform at the low end of opening weekend B.O. expectations given its late arrival amid the current onslaught of animated entertainments. But pic is zippy enough to delight youngsters and clever enough to engage their parents.
Although best known as a writer and/or director of live-action features ("Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls," "Bruce Almighty"), Oedekerk comes to the table with ample toon credentials, having scripted and produced the Oscar-nominated "Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius" (based on the Nickelodeon TV series he created) and the Imax-size "Santa vs. the Snowman 3D." Equally important, he's the grand kahuna of the Omation Studios animation facility in San Clemente, Calif.
For his debut as helmer of an animated feature, Oedekerk gets considerable comic mileage from the confirmation of a suspicion long held by many (if not most) pet owners: While humans are away, animals walk (on two legs) and talk, sing, dance and party hearty. In the world according to "Barnyard," all the critters who inhabit the bucolic farm of a clueless farmer are exuberantly anthropomorphic.
Indeed, it seems there's only one really serious quadruped (who, of course, is secretly a biped) on the entire spread: Ben the Cow (voiced by Sam Elliott), the acknowledged leader and vigilant protector of the animal population.
At night, as the farmer blissfully slumbers, Ben keeps watch for marauding coyotes while the other animals -- including Otis (Kevin James), Ben's gleefully irresponsible son -- whoop it up. Among the other party animals: Miles (Danny Glover), a sage mule who's not too old to shake a hoof; Pip (Jeff Garcia), a hyperactive mouse; Freddy (Cam Clarke), a high-strung ferret who's hard-pressed to resist tasty chickens like Etta (Andie MacDowell); and Pig (Tino Insana), who is, well, a pig.
Newly arrived is Daisy (Courteney Cox), a recently widowed and very pregnant cow who lost her entire family after a sudden storm.
Otis always changes the subject when his father talks about "responsibility" and "maturity." But when Ben is no longer able to guard the farm against the depredations of Dag the Coyote (David Koechner) and his companions, Otis is forced to grow up fast and heed his father's motto: "A strong man stands up for himself; a stronger man stands up for others."
The vocal performers are exceptionally well cast across the board. Elliott effortlessly conveys both grizzled authority and paternal concern. (He also does a respectable job of singing Tom Petty's "I Won't Back Down," one of several aptly chosen pop tunes on the soundtrack.) James, Cox and Glover are also standouts, while Koechner makes a memorable impression as arguably the scariest toon villain since Scar spooked "The Lion King."
Even in this age when CGI toons are commonplace, the Omation computer-generated 3-D imagery in "Barnyard" is pretty doggone spectacular. As often is the case, some of the biggest laughs are generated by throwaway marginalia. (A dance line of horses is billed as "Lord of the Hoof," while chickens toss darts at a photo of Col. Sanders.) But it's the fluid and flexible movements of the imaginatively and amusingly detailed creatures that really hold interest.
A few parents may resent being asked by their puzzled children about those prominent udders. Other parents may be upset by the genuinely scary depiction of the hungry coyotes, who often appear like bit players from the "Howling" horror franchise.
Product placement spotters will note the plug for Par's upcoming barnyard live-actioner "Charlotte's Web."
