 “Battle in Seattle” is a film that leaves bruises. A visceral fictionalized account of the 1999 demonstrations in Seattle against the World Trade Organization, it repeatedly plunges you into the kicking and screaming melee of peaceful protest gone awry. Cries rend the air and bodies crumple as police batons are swung and tear-gas canisters explode. This is what happens, the movie warns, when the powers that be are unprepared for the magnitude of organized opposition and impulsively lash back. Resistance gives way to fury, and fury incites chaos.  The filmmaking debut of Stuart Townsend, an Irish actor,  “Battle in Seattle” makes no bones about where its sympathies lie. Except for the anarchistic fringe, it is wholeheartedly on the side of the demonstrators, a loose coalition of grass-roots activists from the environmental and labor movements joined by students and other groups who opposed globalization.  Some 40,000 demonstrators, far more than were expected, descended on Seattle in late November 1999, determined to shut down the first W.T.O. ministerial conference to be held on American soil. During five days of civil strife they prevented many of the trade ministers from attending the conference.  Stylistically and polemically “Battle in Seattle” is a descendant of Haskell Wexler’s much more complex 1969 movie, “Medium Cool.” Filmed on the streets in Chicago during the 1968 Democratic National Convention, “Medium Cool” mixed scenes of the violent confrontations between demonstrators and the police with the fictional story of a television cameraman. “Battle in Seattle” shoehorns in television footage of the actual protests.  But a drama is only as convincing as its characters. The people awkwardly forced together in “Battle in Seattle” are rhetorical mouthpieces tied to the sketchy plotlines of a so-so Hollywood ensemble movie. As in the much better written but equally schematic “Crash,” you can hear the machinery grind and squeak as the scales are balanced.  At the heart of the story is Dale (Woody Harrelson), a puppy-eyed policeman whose wife, Ella (Charlize Theron), works in a downtown department store and is five months pregnant. When the store closes early after its windows are smashed, Ella, struggling to get home, is caught up in the crowd and randomly struck in the stomach with a police baton. If Ms. Theron conveys almost unbearable pain in this scene, what happens to her is all we really know about her. She is a rhetorical plot device.  As the street battles intensify and Dale is denied time off, his rage and frustration drive him to pursue Jay (Martin Henderson), one of the movie’s three representative demonstrators, into a church where he beats him to a pulp. In the preposterously mawkish scene that sinks the film, he eventually calms down, locates Jay and apologizes, and they exchange words of understanding and forgiveness.  The movie tosses in a half-hearted romance between Jay and Lou (Michelle Rodriguez), a hard-shelled fellow demonstrator, who hook up after they collaborate on a daredevil mission to unfurl an anti-W.T.O. banner from a crane. Django (André Benjamin), the gentlest of the three, is a grinning, guitar-strumming ninny who marches on the street dressed as a turtle.  Other semiheroic figures include Jean Asbury (Connie Nielsen), a television news reporter who joins the demonstrators after observing the police brutality; Dr. Maric (Rade Serbedzija), a representative of Doctors Without Borders who angrily lectures the few W.T.O. ministers who show up about the organization’s preference for profits over people; and Sam (Jennifer Carpenter), a lawyer who argues for the demonstrators’ release from jail.  Trying to mediate between the parties is Mayor Jim Tobin (a miscast Ray Liotta), a fictional surrogate for Paul Schell, Seattle’s mayor at the time. A former Vietnam War protester who insists that the police act with restraint, he is pressured by the governor and the White House to take decisive action after store windows are smashed and intersections are blocked. As he summons the National Guard, declares a curfew and orders mass arrests, the internal drama behind his choices is only perfunctorily acknowledged, and a dramatic opportunity is lost.  The afterword that crawls across the screen at the end of “Battle in Seattle” declares that little has changed since 1999. When W.T.O. ministers met in Cancún, Mexico, in 2003, a heavily patrolled two-mile exclusion zone was established; so much for organized protest.  “Battle in Seattle” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has scenes of violence and strong language.

Stuart Townsend's "Battle in Seattle" is a fictionalized recap of 1999's first Stateside WTO ministerial conference, where outbreaks of violence focused global (or at least North American) attention on the underlying issues as never before -- and so far, never again. Landing halfway between "Medium Cool" and a '70s disaster pic, drama has some conventional ideas and weak writing. But it mostly works, as a non-didactic portrait of the clash between grassroots activists and the powers-that-be. U.S. production will likely score just modest returns on home turf; pic might click better with select overseas auds.
Such is the low ebb to which the globalization debate has sunk in the U.S., that it took an Irish actor to make the first major narrative feature about the events in question.
Opening credits roll under a brief, illustrated lecture about post-WWII First World trade policies. Then dramatis personae are introduced, starting with Jay (Martin Henderson) and Lou (Michelle Rodriguez) as they unfurl a banner suggesting that the closed-door WTO sessions are the opposite of democracy in action. Jay's a firebrand in environmental activism; Lou's the angry offspring of a researcher who uses animals in testing. Romantic sparks fly, though predictably, Jay must assuage tough Lou's trust issues.
Meanwhile, Mayor Tobin (Ray Liotta) is trying to ensure that the coming days allow both WTO attendees and the many thousands of expected protesters to do what they came to do, peaceably. But protesters outfox police in shutting down several key intersections and closing off the convention's opening venue, while so-called anarchists vandalize some downtown businesses, ignoring the pleas of Jay and most activists that, "This is not a violent protest!"
Immediately the media cry wolf over a "city descending into chaos." Seattle's police chief, the governor and even the White House soon exert maximum pressure on the mayor to use aggressive deterrence tactics. Not long after, cops in riot gear are firing tear gas and using full physical force; a state of emergency is declared, curfew imposed, the National Guard brought in. These decisions ultimately backfire, and many initially hostile toward "tree-huggers" begin to wonder if free speech was sacrificed in Seattle for the sake of furthering an elite economic agenda.
With such issues as global warming, sweatshop labor, sustainable farming et al rising in the public consciousness, it briefly seemed a corner had been turned. But as a series of closing-credit updates suggests, the post-9/11 war on terror did a great deal to bury that momentum.
Effectively mixing original broadcast and amateur vid footage (especially during scenes of crowd panic and police brutality) with interwoven fictive strands, Townsend acquits himself well, if not outstandingly, as both writing and directing newbie.
Helming doesn't approach the harrowing you-are-there quality of a docudrama like "Bloody Sunday," but it's credibly staged for the most part. Screenplay is more problematic, as the human dramas imposed on nonfiction backdrop occasionally feel contrived and sport some flatfooted dialogue. It's awfully convenient that the same handful of characters keep crossing paths amid the chaos, and some convert from apolitically crass to conscientious a little too fast, notably Channing Tatum's knucklehead cop and Connie Nielsen's TV reporter.
Still, pic's ambition, cogency and decent perfs make up for its uneven aspects. Woody Harrelson has some especially good moments as a cop who misdirects his rage after his heavily pregnant wife (Townsend's girlfriend, Charlize Theron) is harmed by one of his fellow officers. Another notable presence is Rade Serbedzija as a doctor trying to draw WTO attention to an African AIDS epidemic.
Shot in Vancouver as well as Seattle, pic is well turned without being overly slick in design and tech depts.

Who makes history? Is it the great man, the great mass, or the great revolutionary vanguard? For the movies, it's usually all three: The studio elites employ famous stars to lead the mass audience into the multiplex. Battle in Seattle , however, is a docudrama that celebrates historical change as spontaneous uprising, and Virtual JFK  is a docu-essay arguing the primacy of the individual.
A first film, written and directed by the Irish actor Stuart Townsend , Battle in Seattle  re-animates the recent past—namely the late-1999 street actions that, as the largest organized protest of the Clinton era, successfully shut down the World Trade Organization 's "Millennium" round of negotiations. While the rest of the developed world quaked in fear of the dreaded Y2K "virus," tens of thousands of costumed demonstrators—described by Thomas Friedman  as "a Noah's ark of flat-earth advocates, protectionist trade unions and yuppies looking for their 1960s fix"—danced in the streets of downtown Seattle.
Billed as the "Battle in Seattle" before it even happened, this was the first Internet protest in history, as someone explains in the movie with reference to the demonstrators' uncanny ability to coordinate blockage of the city's pressure points. For his part, Townsend is rather more labored in orchestrating the ensemble. His protagonists are taken from all sides of the event, including glamorous demonstrators of various persuasions (notably OutKast 's André Benjamin ), a police officer (Woody Harrelson ) and his pregnant wife (Townsend's girlfriend, Charlize Theron ), a feisty TV-news reporter (Connie Nielsen ), Seattle's beleaguered mayor (Ray Liotta ), and a few dissident delegates (among them Isaach De Bankolé ). Their intentions, like Townsend's, are mostly good, and the movie's tumultuous jumble of family crises, tear-gas-drenched demos, and interpolated news was excitedly received at last year's Toronto film festival.
Townsend has made no secret that Battle in Seattle  aspires to be a contemporary version of Medium Cool —the 1970 drama that Haskell Wexler  managed to set amid the 1968 Democratic convention . Like Medium Cool , Battle in Seattle  recounts the radicalization of a TV reporter and gets maximum impact from the spectacle of a vulnerable woman trapped in the midst of police-riot madness. The difference is that where much of Medium Cool  was shot amid the Chicago disturbances, Battle in Seattle  has to restage the action or cobble it together from archival footage. These sequences represent Townsend's best filmmaking, with anarchist kamikazes smashing the Christmas shopping malls as helmeted robots stage counterattacks, everything punctuated by ironies too good to be true. (Starbucks ' CEO complains on TV about the unfairness of having to close up downtown stores during Christmas shopping).
It's not exactly Bloody Sunday  (another model), but still a credible fiesta of unintended consequences, with the system made visible in the damage it wreaks on the protagonists—relationships smashed, trust destroyed, eyes forcibly opened. If any material could justify the we-are-the-world all-overness of Alejandro González Iñárritu 's Babel,  it would be this. But Townsend smothers any sense of global immediacy by covering the action with a frayed patchwork of melodramatic coincidences: The good-looking young people take crazy existential chances, but live to tell the tale; one or two of the older characters accept responsibility for their deeds and get to keep their jobs. Townsend does his best to coax out an affirmative ending: The funkiest of the demonstrators vow to keep on keepin' on.
Flapping like a scarecrow in the wind, Battle in Seattle  is too frantic to make more than a transitory impression, yet too responsibly hackneyed in its characterizations to achieve pure tabloid hysteria. In that sense, it's true to the actual event. The impression that the movie leaves is less what the French activist Yves Frémion  termed an "orgasm of history" than a hiccup. The world held its breath and moved on.
The mass is the audience but the star is the show in Virtual JFK: Vietnam  If Kennedy Had Lived . Film Forum's contribution to the 2008 presidential campaign is an elegantly constructed if misleadingly titled class lecture, written and delivered by Brown professor of international relations James G. Blight , and directed by a former student, Koji Masutani . The question: Can an individual leader take a nation to, or keep it from, war? The conclusion: Individual temperament matters, and John F. Kennedy 's example proves it.
Professor Blight, an associate of Kennedy defense secretary Robert McNamara  (and a consultant on Errol Morris 's The Fog of War ), argues that Kennedy's thousand-day reign was basically one continuous crisis—with Cuba, Berlin , and Indochina as a cycle of blinking flashpoints. Kennedy was traumatized by the Bay of Pigs  debacle and was thereafter, per Blight, the most pressured president in U.S. history. Regarded by the military brass as a "young punk" and taunted by Republican opponents as a wimp, Kennedy was put to the test six times and each time successfully avoided armed confrontation with the Soviets—at odds not only with the Pentagon , but also his own advisors.
Virtual JFK  ponders the mystery of the Kennedy personality mainly as manifested during his televised press conferences—radiating star power, the coolest man in the room disarms adoring tweedy reporters with his dry martini wit. (Thanks to these sequences, Masutani's no-frills, largely black-and-white production is as evocative of early-'60s masculine styles as any episode of Mad Men —an alternate title, actually, given the significance of the Cold War doctrine of Mutually Assured Destruction.) Masutani is restrained in handling the assassination—if overly fastidious in avoiding any mention of the Kennedy administration's clandestine activities in Cuba and Vietnam.
