 In her wonderful 2000 movie, “The Gleaners and I,” the French director Agnès Varda takes a nonfiction ramble through the world of everyday treasure hunting, in urban markets where the poor pick through the leftover lettuce and in trash bins where throwaway people forage for thrown-away sustenance. Wielding a small digital video camera that now feels like an extension of her body, Ms. Varda made a case for gleaning as a philosophy of life, as a way of seeing and of being in a world in which remnants  — food, yes, but also old toys and other such poignant castoffs  —  are cherished and used rather than carelessly discarded.  In her latest, the similarly glorious and generous “The Beaches of Agnès,” Ms. Varda has created something of a sequel to “The Gleaners and I.” Much like that earlier work, it is at once an  illustration of the fine art of foraging and an autobiographical portrait, narrated by its self-described “little old lady, pleasantly plump.” (She’s now 81.)  As before, Ms. Varda is picking through the world, close to home and far afield, finding images that please her and give her pause, like her  wrinkled hand, the one not holding the camera,  that she scrutinizes with rue if no obvious regret. But here the emphasis is on her own life and the images and memories that, with time, have blurred together.  The images are as delightful, unexpected and playfully  uninhibited as Ms. Varda, perhaps the only filmmaker who has both won  the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival and strolled around an art exhibition while costumed as a potato (not at the same time). Born in 1928, she started as a photographer, directing her first feature, “La Pointe-Courte,” in 1954 when most of the French New Wave directors were still dreaming of cinema rather than making it. Often singled out as the movement’s only woman, she cast Jean-Luc Godard as a silent clown in her second feature, “Cléo From 5 to 7,” but is mainly associated with the Left Bank group and  her  friends and occasional colleagues Chris Marker and Alain Resnais.  Though she flashes a tantalizingly rare photograph of Mr. Marker onscreen, half-on or  half-off a motorcycle and wearing goggles, she also makes great, often hilarious use of her camera-shy friend’s eccentricities. Autobiographies can be limned by the company you have kept, which in Ms. Varda’s case includes a rather remarkable and divergent group, from Mr. Marker to Harrison Ford and the gauzy eroticist Zalman King. Mr. Ford, standing in a wintry landscape, and Mr. King, sitting in a summery one, make brief, affectionate appearances. Mr. Marker, by contrast, rather more memorably, appears in the guise of his talisman, an orange tabby named Guillaume-en-Egypte,  represented here by a  cartoon cat with an electronically  obscured voice who rolls his  eyes at the puckish Ms. Varda.  Humor seems to buoy her. Her jokes and moments of visual burlesque might prove startling to those who only or best remember her for “One Sings, the Other Doesn’t,” a 1977 fiction about two friends set against the backdrop of the women’s rights movement, or “Vagabond,” a critically acclaimed 1985 drama about the death of a young woman, which won her the Golden Lion. Her feminism, which now seems part of the air she breathes, a given rather than a cause, probably helped steel her against the industry’s sexism. (She quit one project  after a producer pinched her and, she says, insult to injury, wouldn’t give her final cut.) But she seems to have drawn strength most deeply from her family, specifically her husband, the filmmaker Jacques Demy, who died in 1990.  His name still brings tears to her eyes. Seen intermittently throughout the movie in still photographs and archival footage, he comes across less like a ghostly presence and more like a constant companion. Though she doesn’t give you access to their private affairs, eliding the brute fact that he died from complications  from AIDS, she does something far more precious and seemingly perilous: she lets you into her feelings, to the pleasure she derived from his company and the pain she still feels from his death. She shares Demy unselfishly with the audience, and with the same generosity and tenderness that characterizes her fictionalized film about him, “Jacquot” (1991). (He’s a favorite subject: she also made the 1995 tribute “The Universe of Jacques Demy.”)  Still, I’m glad that Ms. Varda reserves most of the room in this movie for her own story. It’s a remarkable  history, rich in comedy and occasionally heartbreaking, filled with wise reflections and strange digressions about the wonders of life. It’s a life she has come close to perfecting, I think, mostly by keeping her mind as blissfully and enduringly open as her round eyes.  At one point, she says she thinks of all men who look at the sea as Ulysses (she’s an aquatic soul), but she’s every bit the wanderer. Whether she’s roving a beach with a camera or rummaging through flea markets, she seeks and finds, gleaning  —  the word means to collect and examine  —  what this world of wonders has in store.

Approaching 80, Agnes Varda has resolved to film her memoirs in her own inimitable fashion, presenting a strange cocktail of film clips, commissioned photographs, eulogies, family snapshots, thank-yous and reconstructions that is by turns insightful, schmaltzy, anecdotal, critical and nostalgic. Honored this year at Venice with the Glory to the Filmmaker award, Varda proved an early blurrer of fact and fiction, as she reminds us, in her pioneering New Wave opus "La Pointe courte." "The Beaches of Agnes" is a similarly oddball mix that may strike some as overly whimsical but should delight the filmmaker's many fans.
Docu opens on a Belgian beach with mirrors of different styles, shapes and sizes, replicating reflections (and reflections within reflections) of the ocean. But Varda, in casual deconstructionist mode, also films people in the act of setting up the mirrors, stressing the image as collective creation. The entire film consistently unfolds within this binary focus.
Similarly, the beaches Varda has chosen to metaphorically mark the various stages of her progress function both as accurate biography and as artificial construct. When her brother, her sole surviving family member, joins her for reminiscences about the war years spent in a boat anchored in the fishing port of Sete, France, Varda shows children on the quay dressed in gingham frocks to represent her school days there. 
In later installments, though, Varda resorts to simply piling sand on a Parisian street and dressing her staff in bathing suits to kiddingly sustain the conceit. 
The obviously fake reconstructions of her own past echo her far more anguished cinematic re-creations of her dying husband Jacques Demy's childhood in "Jacquot de Nantes." And indeed, Varda conflates past and present as liberally as she does fact and fiction. Her one commercial flop, the Catherine Deneuve/Michel Piccoli-starring "Les Creatures," is transformed into a celluloid enclosure whose walls and ceilings are entirely composed of strips from 35mm prints of the film. 
Distinctions between personal and social issues likewise melt away. Documentary scenes of angry feminist protests in which Varda participated are interspersed with scenes of an enraged Sandrine Bonnaire lashing out in "Vagabond." 
Glimpses of Varda's lesser-known works similarly range from the historical to the downright diverting, from extensive footage of the Black Panthers and the Cuban and Chinese revolutions to Jane Birkin and Laura Betti re-creating a Laurel and Hardy slapstick routine.
But it is the plump, diminutive Varda herself who dominates the film, whether at the helm of a yellow boat sailing down the Seine, standing before a 25-foot blowup of her photo of Gerard Philipe or recalling her friendship with Jim Morrison over photos of the two lazing on the grass.
Camera (color, HD-to-DCP), Alain Sakot, Helene Louvart, Arlene Nelson, Varda; editors, Varda, Jean-Baptiste Morin, Baptiste Filloux; music, Joanna Bruzdowicz, Stephane Vilar, Paule Cornet; production designer, Franckie Diago; sound, Olivier Goinard. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (noncompeting), Sept. 2, 2008. (Also in Toronto Film Festival -- Masters.) Running time: 115 MIN.

 


The cinema, social theorist and sometime filmmaker Edgar Morin  argued, is the model for our "mental commerce" with the world. Even awake and in the street, Morin wrote, we walk in solitary daydreams, "surrounded by a cloud of images. . . . The substance of the imaginary is mixed up with our life of the soul."
Filmmaker Agnès Varda agrees, and since her 1990 documentary-cum-staged-portrait of her critically ill husband, filmmaker Jacques Demy , Morin's idea of "semi-imaginary reality" has been Varda 's subject. The great idiosyncratic original of the French nouvelle vague generation, Varda began her career as a photographer and, in her use of the medium, remains one at heart. Features and documentaries are equally characterized by a fascination with the found and the serendipitous, capturing the momentary and pondering the ways in which memory becomes something tangible—or the way memory shapes the world.
The interplay of past and present—typical of Jacquot de Nantes   and Varda's subsequent first-person essays, The Gleaners and I  and Cinévardaphoto —reaches its apogee with The Beaches of Agnès , a memoir drawing on the 81-year-old artist's films and photographs as well as her recollections. It's also a vehicle: "I'm playing the role of a little old lady, talkative and plump," she tells us up front. A stylized creature—small and sturdy, with bowl-cut hair and a proud baton of a nose—Varda is, to some degree, self-invented (having changed her name as a teenager from the ultra-French "Arlette" to the more austere "Agnès") and highly self-aware, directing her assistants to set up a half-dozen mirrors on the windswept Belgian seaside as Schubert's "Unfinished Symphony" wells up on the soundtrack.
The beach is not only a superb location in which to frame an individual, but the place where people confront the infinite or discover traces of the past washed up onshore. Varda equates those who gaze at the sea with Ulysses; she herself is often dreaming of home. The artist re-creates childhood tableaux using old family photos; redeploys footage documenting her first meeting with her Greek relations; and revisits homes of her youth in Brussels  and the Mediterranean port Sète, where her family relocated during World War II and where, at 26, she made her first movie, the low-budget neorealist experiment La pointe-courte . Other film locations are recalled, notably Los Angeles ("such an intense pleasure to live there"). Associates drop by or are recalled: Jane Birkin  appears in several guises (including as Stan Laurel ); Chris Marker  materializes in the form of his trademark cartoon cat; and Jim Morrison  is evoked. But mainly, the movie is benignly haunted by Demy.
The Beaches of Agnès  documents Varda's artistic growth, along with her life, as she evolves from bustling scene-maker to self-conscious autobiographer. Her sense of filmmaking is modest, yet baroque; her sensibility is fey, but tough. Impressed as a girl by the surrealists, she has continued to cultivate their taste for flea markets and crazy contraptions. The installations that populate Beaches  have both elements: Varda's most elaborate setup dumps truckloads of sand on the Rue Daguerre  to create an alfresco production office in the middle of Montparnasse. Another has walls of unspooled 35mm film, fashioned from Varda's 1966 science-fiction flop Les créatures , fashioned into an imaginary home.
This highly personal filmmaker not only made her husband's biography as he was dying of AIDS (the specific disease is something she makes public only in Beaches ), but she put her children in her movies and used her courtyard as a studio—here, re-created in a "real" studio. The mental commerce between Varda's life and her work is resolutely two-way. Her two great fiction films—Cleo From 5 to 7  (1962) and Vagabond  (1985), each featuring a strongly delineated existential heroine—were closer to psychodrama than anyone imagined them to be. In a sense, Varda has done for herself what she did for Demy—creating a work, as charming as it is touching, that serves to explicate and enrich an entire oeuvre.
jhoberman@villagevoice.com
