Sometimes hair dye and lipstick speak louder than banners and raised fists. Or so concluded six professional hairdressers from America who, in 2003, set up a school in the capital of Afghanistan to train local women in the business of doing hair and makeup. That the students had, until recently, been forced by Taliban rule to shroud themselves in public in head-to-toe burkas was no small part of the venture's revolutionary underpinnings; that the volunteer teachers included three Afghan-Americans returning home for the first time in over two decades was, likewise, a gesture chosen for political resonance. (The project was financed by American beauty-industry types with an eye for the synergy between idealism and capitalism: Kabul ladies can be encouraged to buy volumizing shampoo too.)
The Beauty Academy of Kabul , a documentary record of this high-concept experiment in the peace-building properties of perming techniques, isn't the prettiest thing — filmmaker Liz Mermin, who specializes in social-issue docs, gives her picture a home-grown look that borders on unkempt, with scraggly editing and unnecessarily dinky typography to establish timelines and character IDs. But as the visiting Westerners assert their way around baffled Kabul men and the Eastern hairdressers-in-training open up about their lives, the documentary takes on its own engaging shape — one of edgy editorial and political ambivalence.
A strapping American beautician begins her teaching stint by leading the group in a New Agey meditation. (Most of the trainees, some of whom arrive toting children, keep their eyes open; some giggle, awkward.) Another American import, a self-styled outspoken spitfire, enjoys freaking out the male populace by driving a car — something few Afghan women would do — and bossing around the men whose muscle power built the shop.
What do the students really think of their teachers, these well-intentioned outsiders with booming voices who've come to liberate their sisters from the tyranny of bad haircuts? Mermin never tells. Instead, the camera observes the armed soldiers in the streets, catches the shy smile of a trainee praised for her technique, and follows the homemaking labors of women who until recently haven't even been allowed to have a face in public, let alone adorn it.


In an act of "selfless service," a group of American women, backed by industry giants like Clairol and Vogue, open a beauty school in war-ravaged Afghanistan in "Beauty Academy of Kabul." The anomalies are manifold: Gun-toting soldiers patrolling the streets are visible through the windows as rookie beauticians busily snip, perm and tweeze. Although helmer Liz Mermin's straight-faced adherence to her subject tends to diffuse the cultural dissonance the pic reveals, docu's feminist optimism should still serve Wellspring well domestically, while pic retains enough absurdist contradictions to satisfy cynical European auds. 
Mermin achieves an easy intimacy with students and instructors alike. Pic alternates between scenes in the elegant academy, where the mindsets of the teachers dominate, and visits to the home salons of their various Afghan students, most of whom have husbands and children, where quite another set of values holds sway.
The teachers are a mixed bag, though many seem afflicted with vocational fervor, given to statements like "she is healing a country, one by one -- that's what hairdressers do, they heal people." Carrying the analogy one step further, they dub themselves "Beauty Without Borders."
Chastising women who go without makeup and lecturing pupils in their obligation to represent modernity, they never entertain the possibility that progress may lie in the eye of the beholder. Mermin frequently crosscuts to assorted insert-shots of closely listening students to establish a certain ironic distance from the well-meaning barrage of cosmetics propaganda.
It is clear the volunteers feel genuine affection for their Third World sisters, and find their ability to cope with excruciating living conditions awe-inspiring. Yet an unconscious arrogance informs their assumptions: When they ask a student how her country would be different if women ran it, she answers that couldn't happen, the men wouldn't allow it. The instructors bow their heads in silence until the woman, alarmed, asks if she gave the wrong answer.
Indeed, in Lynda Hall's compositions, the gestures and body language of the teachers often seem theatrical, overstated, larger than life. In contrast, the Afghan women display an extraordinary ease with their bodies and with each other, unselfconsciously accepting the camera as an invited guest.
Among the staffers are two Afghan women who have lived in America, returning to their native country for the first time in decades. Their authentic anguish stands in stark contrast to the New Age babble of some of their beautician sisters.
The beauticians who take the three-month class definitely find empowerment through the experience, though perhaps not in the precise way it was intended. A cottage industry that doesn't require much capital, beauty salons help repair the image of womanhood so damaged by the Taliban while providing women with extremely profitable livelihoods. Since the trainees who come to the school already enjoy a measure of freedom, they function as ambassadors rather than as recipients of cultural change, a distinction sometimes lost on their teachers but rarely on the women themselves.
Mermin's Afghanistan is one of ruins and devastation, excursions to the countryside revealing only more of the same. This tabla rasa
 vision contrasts interestingly with another documentary unspooled at Tribeca, Iranian Yassamin Maleknasr's view of her neighboring country as a continuous, still-viable civilization in the throes of yet another change in "Afghanistan: The Lost Truth."
Camera (color, HD), Lynda Hall; music, Ahmad Zahir; sound, Anna Rieke; associate producer, Marcella Steingart. Reviewed on videocassette, New York, April 29, 2004. (In Tribeca Film Festival -- competing.) Running time: 74 MIN.
 


The Ugly American gets her day in court with two documentaries this week, and the verdict is mixed. Mardi Gras: Made in China  records the Girls Gone Wild spectacle of the Bourbon Street  celebrations, where gaudy plastic necklaces get flung around in a drunken quid pro quo of boobs for beads. (All together now: "Show us your tits!") Director David Redmon  also visits the girls and women who produce the necklaces in the prison-like Tai Kuen  factory compound in Fuzhou . They start as early as age 14 and work 12 to 20 hours per day for 10 cents an hour, their hands blistered and bloodied and their dreadful pay routinely slashed when they don't meet their impossible quotas.
Redmon shows his trump card when he screens footage of the New Orleans festivities to the Chinese workers and vice versa; the laborers are mostly amused that anyone would covet such ugly baubles, but back at Mardi Gras central, the images from Tai Kuen push the needle off the record and turn the house lights on the party. "It's not fun," understates a suddenly sober reveler. Also featuring the sanguine realpolitik of the rich, tyrannical Chinese factory boss (whose favorite word seems to be "punishment") and his richer American outsourcer, this sly, engrossing doc is an expert riposte to smug proponents of the fetterless free market.
Liz Mermin 's The Beauty Academy of Kabul   also rests on a cultural exchange, beginning in summer 2003 as beauticians arrive in the blighted city to teach their trade to an eager inaugural class, some of whom still wear the commonplace burka. The idea isn't as odd as it might first appear, since running a salon is one of the few socially acceptable means for a woman in Afghanistan  to earn an income. The execution, however, evokes a particularly outlandish Christopher Guest  mockumentary. A vast foghorn of a spiky-coiffed woman hollers at her giggling pupils that Afghanistan's postwar progress depends on their attaining "a more modern-type look . . . Yer stuck in a rut, guys!" Another recommends meditation to a woman feeling bullied by her husband and children and later adds, "I'm a hairdresser—I heal people." And prim blonde Terri is a role tailor-made for Catherine O'Hara , especially when she advises that students who have trouble sleeping "should speak to a professional"—this in a city where running water and electricity are luxuries.
The movie carefully obscures its attitude toward these stunning Samaritans, or so it would seem. When Terri declares that her "inspirational" pupils are "moving on. . . . They're not dwelling on the past," Mermin cuts to a picnic of returned Afghans on the site of their former homes, long since bombed to oblivion by the Soviets—the ruins of the past dwelling all around them.
