 "I'd like to write songs that are so good nobody understands them, including me," the Texan singer-songwriter Townes Van Zandt remarks half-seriously in Margaret Brown's tender, impressionistic film biography, "Be Here to Love Me." The words evoke the shadowy images in many of the songs written by Van Zandt, a country-folk troubadour who died of a heart attack on Jan. 1, 1997, while recovering from a broken hip; he was 52.  Van Zandt's most famous song, "Pancho and Lefty," which Willie Nelson and Merle Haggard made into a No. 1 country hit in 1983, is typical: a visionary story of a drifter and an outlaw roaming through a mythic Old West landscape. Its stark language includes the indelible lines heard more than once in the movie: "Now you wear your skin like iron/Your breath's as hard as kerosene."  Stylistically, Van Zandt's songs dwell in the limbo between folk and country. Because he was Texan and played the same circuit as other, more hard-boiled Texan troubadours, he is sometimes categorized as a country "outlaw." But because his pure, sweet baritone lacked a husky, lived-in twang, and his writing partook as much of heaven as of the earth, his ethereality set him apart. The singer and songwriter he most closely resembled is Lyle Lovett, who appears briefly late in the film.  Ms. Brown has gathered an impressive array of clips from television interviews and live performances and arranged them into a rough chronology. Van Zandt's close friend Guy Clark, Kris Kristofferson (musing about the sacrificial life of the artist), Jerry Jeff Walker, Steve Earle and Mr. Nelson are among those who pay him tribute. His three former wives and three children also reminisce and speculate.  Van Zandt comes across as an appealing but incorrigible problem child. A lanky beanpole of a man with a pronounced physical resemblance to Anthony Perkins, he had an endearing, boyish smile that mirrors the sensitivity quivering in his voice.  His story, told in bits and pieces, is a mostly sad one of an unstable, unlucky man, the son of a wealthy Fort Worth oil executive, fending off demons. His wanderlust began in the 1960's when he left the first of his three marriages to "blow everything off." He was periodically addicted to alcohol and drugs. His wives appear to be have been tolerant caretakers. To his children, for whom he was more absent than present, he remains a tantalizing mystery.  As a young man, his sister recalls, Van Zandt deliberately fell backward out of a fourth-story window "just to see what it felt like." That incident caused him to be put in a mental hospital, where he was given electric shock therapy that erased his childhood memories. He developed an obsession with the blues guitarist Lightnin' Hopkins, who became a major influence on his playing.  For all his charm and talent, Van Zandt lacked the wherewithal to build a solid career (in three decades of recording erratically, he never had a hit of his own) or personal life. Near the end of his life, one of his admirers, Steve Shelley of Sonic Youth, collaborated with him on a recording that was never completed.  Here, as in so many other documentaries about troubled musicians, the word genius is casually tossed around. But does every unstable, self-destructive artist defiantly living on the edge qualify for that description? In Van Zandt's case, maybe yes.

Be Here to Love Me: A Film About Townes Van Zandt
 (Docu)
  By 
EDDIE COCKRELL

    
 
 
 
The poignant profile of a troubled troubadour, "Be Here to Love Me" is a dignified and wistful look at the unusual life, difficult career and lasting influence of singer-songwriter Townes Van Zandt. Continuing their focus on music-driven acquisitions with a post-Toronto fest buy, Palm Pictures promises a mid-2005 theatrical release. In the meantime, pic will be a popular fest and specialized theatrical attraction worldwide, with Palm's eventual DVD sure to be in demand from fans and new converts.
Pic's title comes from a song off Van Zandt's second, most aurally lush and distinctive, record, 1969's "Our Mother the Mountain." Covered by Norah Jones on her soph outing, "Feels Like Home," tune sets the tone for first-time helmer Margaret Brown's exploration of Van Zandt's legacy: "Your eyes seek conclusion in all this confusion of mine," he wrote, "I want you to stay and hold me and tell me you'll be here to love me today."
Among those influenced at various stages of their careers by Van Zandt's songwriting are interviewees Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson, Emmylou Harris and Steve Earle. Sonic Youth's Steve Shelley, who was producing sessions for Van Zandt in 1997 when he died at 52 of a heart attack following hip surgery, best sums up the legacy, noting that what makes Van Zandt great is that is music couldn't be categorized as either Country, Blues, Folk or Pop.
Tall and skinny, with a quiet demeanor and aw-shucks grin, Van Zandt was born into affluence in Ft. Worth, Texas, in 1944. A troubled childhood resulted in shock therapy treatments that essentially erased his memory, and he drifted away from the first of his three marriages in the mid-1960s to "blow everything off ... get a guitar and go."
Though his prolific output earned him the immediate respect of his peers, Van Zandt's records kept going out of print and he was dogged by substance abuse. In a career that spanned 30 years, he never had anything approaching a hit record himself -- though Nelson and Merle Haggard went to No. 1 on the country charts in 1983 with his "Pancho & Lefty," and the subsequent roster of those who've covered his songs is impressively long.
Helmer Margaret Brown arranges the interview, performance and poignant homemovie material chronologically, rendering the essential elusiveness of what made Van Zandt tick more of a mystery than a narrative impediment. "I don't envision a very long life for myself," he says matter-of-factly near the beginning, underscoring his eccentricity by later announcing, "I'd like to write songs that are so good nobody understands 'em -- including me."
Tech package is pro, with regular Richard Linklater d.p. Lee Daniel smoothly integrating the range of film and vid sources into a pleasing whole. Toronto fest screenings were on crisp digital vid, with 35mm prints promised after Palm Pictures' pick-up.

Townes Van Zandt  the songwriter pricks up the ears. The road-loving bandit of "Pancho & Lefty" wears his "skin like iron," and his "breath's as hard as kerosene." The guy who has better things to do in "Waitin' 'Round to Die," inspired by his runaway battered mother, turns gambler and boozer, then thief, finally settling down as an unobtrusive codeine addict. In his art, normal was abnormal, and in his life, portrayed in Margaret Brown 's unblinking documentary Be Here to Love Me , he tested this theory. As notorious for his substance abuse and death wishes as he was for a mysterious ability to survive them, Van Zandt died in 1997 of a mere heart attack. He was 52. "I booked this gig 30 years ago," joked friend and fellow musician Guy Clark  at the funeral, swallowing tears.
Watching clips from the same type of concert over a 30-year spread is effective; while we keep looking for a slip-up that never happens, a friend worries that Van Zandt's extreme self-destructiveness drew others to him out of a "morbid curiosity to watch someone fall from a great height." Loving but frank, Brown, by refusing to judge her film's subject, never falls into this trap. Too frequently, however, the side-of-the-road montages that are meant to mesmerize offer only blurry filler instead.
Born wealthy in Texas, Van Zandt rarely permitted himself the levity to trash his roots, although a chuckle bubbles up in "Fraternity Blues." Maybe that's because wealth cultivated his dark side way before he discovered hippies, legal LSD, and ramblin'. Sent to boarding school in Illinois as a teen for football and a career in the military, Van Zandt found his first love instead: airplane glue, passed off as harmless fun in a yearbook group photo circa 1960. Glassy-eyed, his head in someone else's lap, Townes is the kid with the sock stuck in his mouth. Nothing he would do later as an adult—from jumping off a fourth-floor terrace "to see how it felt" to shooting up bourbon mixed with Coca-Cola —seemed sadder, or creepier, than that.
