 A more accurate title of this conceptually anemic if prettily mounted take on the Scandinavian epic might be "Beowulf & the Vixen." Directed by Sturla Gunnarsson, a Canadian resident of Icelandic birth, this English-language version of the poem boils the classic text down into a generic action flick, complete with sweeping Icelandic vistas, clanging fights, galloping horses, a chiseled hero and a witchy woman who keeps her front door unlocked for both the good guy and the bad. Every so often a severed head lazily rolls across the frame, though alas not often enough.  Written at some point  between the seventh and 10th centuries, the original "Beowulf" tells the story of a warrior who saves the Danes from the great monster Grendel and the creature's vengeful mother before succumbing, decades later, to a dragon. Grendel is dead about a quarter of the way into the narrative, but perhaps because he has the makings of such a juicy threat he remains alive for most of the film. Keeping the monster alive  also dovetails with the action-film formula in which a hero (the dashing Gerard Butler as Beowulf) battles a villain (the imposing Ingvar Sigurdsson as Grendel) while simultaneously learning some inevitable life lessons on his way to the deadly climax.  The chief lesson imparted here by the screenwriter Andrew Rai Berzins is that this Grendel is not a mythic force with a direct line back to Cain, but akin to a persecuted, disappointingly human (if hairy) ethnic minority. Grendel kills not because he is a demon, the necessary embodiment of all that humans fear, but because when he was just a small fleck of blond fuzz, a Dane king (Stellan Skarsgard, beet-red and yowling) murdered his father. With all the mystery and meaning sucked from the story, the filmmakers do what filmmakers often do when faced with their own lack of imagination: they toss a little sex in with the violence, which here means that poor Sarah Polley, as the friendly neighborhood witch, has to bat her lashes at two opponents better suited to batting each other.  "Beowulf & Grendel" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).  Adult language, rolling heads and miscellaneous violence.

In "Beowulf & Grendel," the first epic poem in the English language receives a rendition that's about half as good and half as harsh as it needed to be. Icelandic-shot version of the legendary revenge saga is visually arresting and plausibly retrofitted for modern consumption, but lacks the savage bite that might have given the sixth century-set tale real impact. Semi-name cast and literary pedigree could boost the pic into modest specialized playoff, with better results likely in foreign and ancillary.
"Beowulf" was transcribed from its pre-existing oral form sometime between 700-1000 A.D. in an early English that is essentially impossible for lay people to read today. Tale tells of a Danish king who, having killed a fearsome troll, some years later recruits the help of the foreign warrior Beowulf to battle the vengeful son of the troll he slaughtered.
It's a story of barbarism and brute force played out by uncivilized louts in a frigid land still more pagan than Christian. While many of its particulars are offputting, the yarn retains a fascination embodied by its elemental qualities and its reflection of the origins of Anglo-Saxon and Germanic-Scandinavian mythology.
In a prologue entitled "A Hate Is Born," Hrothgar (Stellan Skarsgard), the king of Dane land, butchers a bothersome troll but spares his young son, an albinoish cretin who, against a spectacular backdrop of sheer cliffs, black beaches and crashing waves, chops off his dead father's head and makes off with it.
Several years later, after the young troll, Grendel (Ingvar Sigurdsson), has begun exacting his revenge by killing most of the occupants of the king's great hall, the drunken and depressed Hrothgar engages Beowulf and his small band of companions from Geatland (southern Sweden) to track down the elusive creature.
"This troll must be one tough prick!" a soldier exclaims in one of the script's more comical attempts to give a contempo ring to the ancient story. More often, the approach is stolidly conventional, lacking most of all a kind of fierce primitivism that might have sent a primordial chill down the spines of viewers and characters alike.
Director Sturla Gunnarsson seems aware of the savagery intrinsic to the story, but is unable to mine it deeply, proving too genteel in the end to make a genuinely creepy or disturbing film. He is not, however, averse to injecting it with humor, as when the Danish king admits he's heard of Christ but wonders if Jesus ever had to deal with a troll -- or when, in an optimistic moment, the monarch proposes a toast "to the end of gloom!"
Butler cuts a somewhat more commanding figure here than he did as the woeful Phantom of the Opera, while Skarsgard oozes remorse and boozy breath as the distinctly unregal king. In the company of the male actors' assorted North Sea burrs, Sarah Polley's flat North American accent sticks out oddly in her representation as a raven-haired, sexually open-minded witch willing to welcome to her lair both the troll and the man who would kill him.
Stark, barren Icelandic locations stand front and center in Jan Kiesser's muscular widescreen compositions. Rugged costumes are convincing, and score goes part of the way to providing an epic spirit.
Camera (Deluxe color, widescreen), Jan Kiesser; editor, Jeff Warren; music, Hilmar Orn Hilmarsson; production designer, Arni Pall Johannsson; art director, Einar Unnsteinsson; set decorator, Linda Stefansdottir; costume designer, Debra Hanson; sound (Dolby Digital), Simon Okin; re-recording mixers, Lou Solakofski, Stephan Carrier; makeup effects designer, Nick Dudman; line producers, Mark Winemaker, Stephen Turnbull; associate producer, Douglas E. Hansen; assistant director, Wendy Ord; second unit director, Rick Forsayeth; stunt coordinator, Peter Pedrero; casting, Pamela Dixon. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Special Presentation), Sept. 13, 2005. Running time: 103 MIN.

 


Today's moviegoers may have all the respect in the world for Anglo-Saxon poetry, Norse legend, and the tenets of early Christianity, but the real attraction of Beowulf & Grendel  might be summed up in the observation of an iron-helmeted Geat warrior in hot pursuit of the giant villain: "I tell ya," he says. "This troll must be one tough prick." Thus does Beowulf collide with postmodern punk sensibility.
Not everything in Iceland -born director Sturla Gunnarsson 's irreverent take on Beowulf is wise-guy work, but it sure looks like Gunnarsson and his Canadian screenwriter, Andrew Rai Berzins , are as familiar with Monty Python  as with Teutonic lit. How else to explain that the fearsome Grendel (Ingvar Sigurdsson ) parades around in the kind of big furry boots favored by slinky supermodels in the aprés-ski bars of Aspen, and that the entire production, shot in the more barren and forbidding reaches of the director's native land, looks like a cross between a WWE grudge match and the Sturgis biker rally. Gunnarsson and Berzins have dispensed with the original Beowulf 's fire-breathing dragon, but they don't really need him: The motley, bearded collection of Geats and Danes and the suboceanic demons who do ferocious battle here would scare the inmates in maximum security half to death. The filmmakers also grapple artfully with a variety of moral and historical issues: Their nouveau Beowulf (Gerard Butler ) is a man with a conscience, not a stone killer, and their Grendel is a monster wronged.
For those who've never had much luck plowing through Beowulf 's 3,200 lines of alliterative Old English, Gunnarsson's version might be a useful alternative—as long as you're not dead set on linguistic purity or the parable about honor and duty that defines the original. It's good, bloody fun that stirs the intellect whenever it feels like it, and as a swashbuckler, the dead-game Butler outswings just about anyone in Troy or Kingdom of Heaven or Tristan & Isolde . Those overblown historical epics played just as loosely with history as this one does, but they didn't boast a third of its bawdy, sly humor.
