he Best of Youth" was shown as part of the 2003 New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from A. O. Scott's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 11, 2003. The unrated film, in Italian with English subtitles, opens today at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Sixth Avenue, South Village. One subject of "The Best of Youth," a six-hour film that will be shown in two parts, is the transformation of Italy into a modern consumer society. In the montage of newspaper images that introduces Part 1, the major symbol of this change is television, and one of the first things we see is a boxy old set being hauled up the stairs of a Rome apartment building. This is only fitting, since "The Best of Youth" was originally made as a mini-series for Italian television and was broadcast in several other European countries after being released theatrically in Italy. Its genesis as a multi-episode small-screen epic accounts for its length, but also makes it easier to take. The director, Marco Tullio Giordana, is motivated by generosity - toward both his characters and his audience - rather than by self-indulgence. The story he has to tell, written by Sandro Petraglia and Stefano Rulli, is full of nuance and complexity, but it is also as accessible and engrossing as a grand 19th-century novel. Yes, "The Best of Youth" is long. But "War and Peace" is long. "Middlemarch" is long. Life is also long, and there is so much life in these six hours - 37 years, to the extent that you can quantify it - that you may marvel at Mr. Giordana's economy. The film begins in Rome in 1966, in the bustling apartment of the middle-class Carati family. There are four children, but most of the attention focuses on Nicola and Matteo, who are studying for their exams and whose contrasting temperaments structure the crowded, expansive drama that follows. Nicola (Luigi Lo Cascio), who is studying medicine, is the more cheerful, while Matteo (Alessio Boni), a would-be philosopher, is volatile and rebellious. He flunks his exams on purpose and impulsively joins the army. While Nicola and Matteo never waver in their love for each other, their lives take radically different paths. After Nicola's hippie sojourn in Norway (which coincides with Matteo's basic training), they meet in Florence during the terrible winter floods of 1966, when young people from all over Italy converged on the city to rescue its artistic and historic treasures - their common cultural patrimony - from the mud. But the blissful, selfless unity of this moment, in which Nicola falls in love with a beautiful music student named Giulia (Sonia Bergamasco), is short-lived. He impulsively transfers to the University of Turin, the northern industrial city that became a center of late-1960's labor militancy, which he eagerly joins. There he and Matteo cross paths again, but they are on opposite sides, since Matteo is part of a police unit charged with suppressing the violent demonstrations. Mr. Giordana's sympathetic gaze seems to fall, with mellow radiance, on all generations and ideological persuasions, much as Nicola himself is able to love both his angry, sometimes brutal brother and Giulia, whose political ideals lead her toward the abyss of radical nihilism. Despite its unblinking attention to the destructive forces at large in Italian society - from the Red Brigades terror and the political scandals of the 1970's to the anti-Mafia campaigns (and further political scandals) of more recent years - the spirit of "The Best of Youth" is quietly, wryly optimistic. Its political point of view turns out to be precisely the tolerant, middle-class humanism, with its belief in human goodness and the possibility of social progress, that the postwar generation claimed to rebel against. Nicola's professional life, which occasionally drifts into the foreground of the story, involves him in efforts to improve the treatment of the mentally ill, and this rather specialized cause is the clearest statement of the film's central idea, which is that a commitment to human dignity is ideology enough. "The Best of Youth," Parts 1 and 2, is at the Film Forum through March 15. There is a separate admission charge for each part. (212) 727-8110.  
The annotated family album as social history, or vice versa, The Best of Youth  is another thick spine on the top shelf of Italian cine-novels. Covering nearly 40 years in a remarkably compact six hours, Marco Tullio Giordana's fleet-footed marathon seeks a country's whole equation among the intellectual middle-class Caratis of Rome  while keeping to the tempos of family routine and reunion. Showing at Film Forum in two parts, the movie has the addictive episodic intimacy of great TV. (Indeed, it was originally intended for the small screen: The state network RAI commissioned The Best of Youth , rejected the final product as too rarefied, then changed its mind after the film won plaudits at Cannes  in 2003.)
Founded on a 600-page script (by Sandro Petraglia  and Stefano Rulli ) and some 240 sets, The Best of Youth  derives its formidable energies from the same yin-yang sibling dynamic as its direct antecedents: Visconti's Rocco and His Brothers  and Gianni Amelio 's The Way We Laughed . Beaming, jocular Nicola (Luigi Lo Cascio) and sensitive, tightly coiled Matteo (Alessio Boni , who bears a striking resemblance to the young Clint Eastwood ), born a year apart, are university students when we meet them in 1966. Matteo volunteers at a clinic for the mentally ill, where he encounters Giorgia (Jasmine Trinca ), an obvious victim of botched electroshock treatment; with his brother's help, Matteo tries and fails to return Giorgia to her rural relations. While The Best of Youth  hardly delivers any Bellocchio-style smackdowns to the cult of the family—if anything, the film idealizes blood ties via the Caratis—it does recognize how unusually lucky Nicola and Matteo (and their two sisters) are in their easeful kinship during the excruciating moment when Giorgia's father smiles nervously and tells her it's time to go back to the hospital.
Giorgia's withdrawal from and reabsorption into institutionalized care is The Best of Youth 's defining event: the last chapter of a dual bildungsroman. Shamed and hardened by his fledgling act of samaritan protest, Matteo throws up his hands and enlists in the army; he later lands jobs as a police photographer—his crime-scene snaps a grisly parody of his youthful shutterbug enthusiasms—and as a suspect-stomping cop. Nicola, typically, is at once unscathed and proactive. He gets bearded and naked with hippies in Norway , marries the student agitator Giulia (the forbidding Sonia Bergamasco , who evokes Monica Vitti  as android), and becomes a progressive psychiatrist who campaigns on behalf of the mentally ill—essentially co-opting Matteo's doomed mercy mission.
The Best of Youth 's approach to history is both head-on and sidelong, variously enfolding the tumultuous protests and terrorist activity of the '70s, the 1992 Palermo  massacre, and assorted World Cup agonies and ecstasies. Players join the Red Brigades and lose their jobs to industrial "reorganization," as well as have secret babies. Perhaps by virtue of being conceived for a domestic audience, the film shrugs off the bulky exposition of most historical epics (the non-Italian viewer might have some light Googling to do after the screenings). But Giordana  ably shoulders his influences, paying homage to Rocco  in his lengthy staging of a decisive New Year's Eve party and its blood-freezing aftermath. As in Visconti and Amelio's brotherly disquisitions, a submerged yet implacable fury simmers throughout, but here the violence is finally turned inward.
