 The little man at the center of the spasmodically funny and bleak love story “Big Fan” doesn’t come with a halo slung over his head. His speeches are written in ballpoint with a heavy hand and delivered with bleats and bellows on the radio. (The words are so deeply inscribed on the page you could read them by touch.) He doesn’t come with a fanfare and, to judge by the square, squat cut of his jib, he’s an unlikely contender. He’s a regular guy or as close to regular as any 35-year-old can possibly be who sleeps under a poster of his favorite football star while tucked under a coverlet imprinted with the names of N.F.L. teams.  As its title suggests, “Big Fan” is about the love that speaks its name, though also often shrieks it in rock arenas, sports stadiums and other public places of worship. That love can be a beautiful, touching thing: I still remember John Belushi kindly taking the time to sign an autograph that I soon threw away. I just wanted the contact with someone I adored (and being a teenager, I had no idea of its possible market value). There’s a kind of grace in that kind of exchange, as the idol recognizes the supplicant and, if only during the seconds it takes to scrawl a name on a scrap of paper, comes down to earth with the rest of us.  An inability to recognize that love gives “Big Fan” its igniting  moment. One evening while chowing down on pizza in Staten Island, two friends, Paul (Patton Oswalt) and Sal (Kevin Corrigan), notice Paul’s favorite Giants player, the fictional Quantrell Bishop (Jonathan Hamm), gassing up his S.U.V. Giddy with excitement, the friends start tailing Bishop. They spend much of their days and most of their solitary nights obsessing about the Giants, swapping stories about the team’s triumphs and defeats like war veterans, so following him seems natural, even if it means entering unknown territory like Manhattan. (Where, an incredulous Paul marvels, there are no parking spaces.) Then Bishop discovers he’s been shadowed and flies into a rage, unleashing all the furious energy that makes him so magnificent on the field.  Paul ends up in the hospital, his head wrapped in bandages. Much of what ensues involves his coming to painful terms with the horror of that violent night, a reckoning that upends his life and a favorite late-evening ritual: his calls into a local sports radio show. These broadcast interludes are the high point of his day, week, perhaps life, giving “Paul from Staten Island,” as he’s called, the chance to advocate on behalf of the Giants while trash-talking the competition. Reading from a notepad and pouring all his libidinal energy into the task, he drops statistics, predicts plays and taunts the enemy, his voice alive with swagger and heat. More than an enthusiast, he is a defender of the faith.  Mr. Oswalt, a standup comic who also voiced Remy the rat in the Pixar animation “Ratatouille,” seems to expand physically during these scenes, almost as if his love for his team made him a giant too. He puffs out his chest and rocks a bit, his voice ebbing and flowing with oratory grandiloquence. There’s no one around, save for his mother (Marcia Jean Kurtz) in the bedroom next door who, borrowing a favorite strategy from Rupert Pupkin’s  mom, occasionally yells at him to shut up. But Paul has an audience, including the admiring Sal, who alone in his own apartment, takes visible, somewhat baffled pride in his friend’s radio performances, smiling along to every beat. Being a big fan also makes Paul into something of a celebrity.  The writer Robert Siegel, here making his debut as a director, doesn’t push the analogy. One of the pleasures of this agreeably low-key and modest film is that he isn’t selling a message or trying to wring a grand metaphor out of his humble material: he’s created a somewhat simple story about a man who turns out to be rather less simple than he first appears. Unlike his script for “The Wrestler,” with its embarrassment of clichés and bucket of tears, the screenplay for “Big Fan” avoids sentimentality without abandoning sentiment. Paul might make you squirm, but Mr. Siegel refuses to sell him out so you can feel more comfortable with his eccentricities, no small thing in contemporary independent cinema.  Working with the cinematographer Michael Simmonds, Mr. Siegel finds a suitably grubby visual look for the film, which  employs handheld camerawork  that alternately puts Paul at an analytical distance and draws him close. (Only when Paul dreams of Bishop do the colors pop.) The unremarkable settings include the gloomy  parking lot where Paul works and the much larger stadium parking lot where he and Sal watch Giant games on a TV run off a car engine. Like Paul’s bedroom, these emptied-out, liminal spaces in which other people are forever coming and going can seem terribly lonely, even sad. But to feel sorry for him is to miss the point of “Big Fan,” which is that a life filled with so much generous love needs no pity.  “Big Fan” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Salty language and self-love.

The psyche of a beyond-the-pale sports nerd is probed, dissected, exposed and otherwise held up to the light in "Big Fan." Directing debut by "The Wrestler" screenwriter Robert Siegel stands as something of a companion piece to Darren Aronofsky's film by virtue of the intense focus it trains on an antisocial man, its grubby near-New York working class setting, the sports milieu and overall extreme behavior stemming from obsession. It's a small, peculiar film, one unlikely to appeal much to women, non-sports fans and mainstreamers, but its uncomfortable comic insights should win it a loyal following in limited theatrical play and down the line when accompanied at home by beer and pizza.
Stand-up comedian Patton Oswalt, who bears more than a passing resemblance to the late Lou Costello, plays Paul Aufiero, the ultimate New York Giants fan. In the isolation of his pay booth at a parking garage, the chubby 36-year-old listens to sports radio all day and scribbles notes for diatribes he delivers on his favorite call-in show at night from the small Staten Island home he shares with his shrill, nagging mother (Marcia Jean Kurtz).
Loyally congratulating Paul on his every word is scruffy pal Sal (Kevin Corrigan). The two head to the Meadowlands for every Giants home game but, unable to afford tickets, they watch the games on TV from the parking lot. They're big-time losers in urgent need of a life, something Paul's wealthy ambulance-chasing lawyer brother Jeff (Gino Cafarelli) tries to remedy. But Paul is a born bottom-dweller for whom upward mobility is not an option.
Throwing Paul's life into a spin is a chance encounter with his favorite Giant, linebacker Quantrell Bishop (Jonathan Hamm). Following the star's car into Manhattan, Paul and Sal pursue him into a pricey strip club where the bling-laden Bishop and his entourage surround themselves with pole dancers. Heedless of etiquette and even unaware how laughably out of place they are, they breach the social barrier. Bishop goes off, leaving a pummeled Paul in his wake.
What follows is a very odd study of denial, obstinacy and refusal to reconsider hero worship even when said hero has nearly killed you. While the Giants put Bishop on suspension after to the incident, Paul declines to press charges. A detective (Matt Servitto) hounds him to get his version of events and Jeff files a multimillion dollar lawsuit against the player despite his idiot brother's opposition. For his part, Paul returns to work and only frets that Bishop's continued absence from the team might allow the hated Philadelphia Eagles to win the division.
Further weirdness leads the script into quasi-Travis Bickle territory, with queasy results, until Siegel pulls a fast one at the end. You don't know quite what you're left with other than a character study of a very warped individual probably destined to live out his life without changing; it would seem that he could only get worse.
Oswalt unerringly captures the mania of this sort of social misfit, such as one can hear any day on sports talkradio. Fortunately, the actor's comic smarts and sense of timing leaven the characterization with considerable humor; without it, Paul would be very hard to take. Corrigan provides a plausible go-along second banana, while most of the supporting roles require their actors to impersonate very loud and argumentative New Yawk types, which they do with absolute conviction.
Shot with the Red digital camera, the pic has a down-and-dirty look that matches its milieu.
Camera (color, DV), Michael Simmonds; editor, Joshua Trank; music, Philip Watts; production designer, Sharoz Makarechi; costume designer, Vera Chow; sound (Dolby Digital), Eric Walendzinski; sound designer, Watts; associate producers, Nick Gallo, Mike Loew; assistant director, Yori Tondrowski; casting, Siegel. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 20, 2009. Running time: 88 MIN.
 


It takes considerable effort to make Darren Aronofsky  seem like a model of restraint, but Robert Siegel  pulls it off in Big Fan. Siegel's screenplay for The Wrestler insisted on beating down Mickey Rourke  at every turn, but Rourke's performance fended off the almost comically over-the-top cavalcade of bad shit. If the screenplay insisted on Rourke-as-fuck-up, the actor subverted it by conveying an inherent nobility that allowed Aronofsky to ground him in a lower-class realism rarely seen on American screens. In his debut as screenwriter and director, Siegel grinds down on, rather than grounds, his protag.
Paul (Patton Oswalt ) is a parking garage attendant whose only pleasure is his nightly AM sports radio call, on which he valiantly defends the Giants against Philly fans. Paul lives in Staten Island  with his mother (Marcia Jean Kurtz ), who's understandably freaked by her son's solitary, thirtysomething dead-end lifestyle, and responds by being a shrieking harridan. We quickly understand that Paul's brother, Jeff (Gino Cafarelli ), is no good because of his thick Guido accent, and that his wife (Serafina Fiore ) is equally worthless because of her orange Real Housewives of New Jersey   tan. The characterizations here aren't noticeably richer than they are in that show: Like reality TV, everyone is exactly who they appear to be in Big Fan .
Things go massively awry when, through a series of events that involve a Times Square  strip club, Paul inadvertently gets his QB idol suspended. Mental anguish ensues. Siegel wants it every which way: Paul's a sexually inert loser with no forward motion to his life, but that's nothing to be alarmed about because he's perfectly harmless if undisturbed. You shouldn't laugh at him, except when you should. Audiences are invited to congratulate themselves for not reviling Paul, as long as they keep him at arm's length.
Flawed though it was, this year's Observe and Report —another outsider black comedy—had the guts to present Seth Rogen 's sociopathic mall cop without excuse or rationalization; the laughs came from the gap between his scary void and the reality around him. Big Fan  instead chooses to beat up its clueless center so that we'll like him more, and then surround him with familiar stereotypes to make him look more authentic.
