
In the intriguing and surprisingly witty docu, "The Big Question," the king of all queries is "What is God?" The answers gathered by filmmakers/actors Francesco Cabras and Alberto Molinari range from deep devotion to solid skepticism. Cleverly, the documakers -- cast in small roles in Mel Gibson's "The Passion of the Christ" -- interviewed that film's cast, crew (including Gibson) and advisers as well as locals in ancient Matera in southern Italy. An in-the-works longer version, set at around 80 minutes, will fit commercial feature proportions for strong worldwide interest, though current shorter version feels like just the right length.
Taking a cue from Pier Paolo Pasolini's amusing docu, "Comizi d'amore," in which the director asked Italians their thoughts on love and sex, Cabras and Molinari approach their weighty subject with a light touch, structuring their work along a series of questions bridged by brief, slightly mystical and purely visual transitions.
The thrust of the questions is often personal -- "Who is God to you?" or "If you were born on the other side of the world, would you have the same religion?" Yet, some of the questions are deliberately provocative -- "Why are depictions of God solely male?" or "What happens after life?"
With only Gibson and "Passion" stars Jim Caviezel (shown briefly, drenched in bloody makeup) and Monica Bellucci recognizable and no respondents identified on screen, there is less a concern for who is answering than the thoughts themselves. This subjectivity is perhaps best seen when various men of the cloth speak for the camera: While most respondents dressed in priestly garb predictably enunciate absolute certainty in their beliefs, a Jesuit priest speaks in far more human and vulnerable terms about his own struggles with alcoholism and his sense of humility.
To an extent, this vulnerability jibes with Gibson, who freely admits that he was spiritually lost from ages 19 to 35, and "if left to my own devices, I'd devolve into chaos." Though Gibson never speaks in specific terms about his own affiliation with the ultra-orthodox Catholic offshoot faith, the Legion of Christ, his comments about himself suggest the need for extreme religious discipline.
Yet "The Big Question" is as ecumenical as possible (one costumed actor observes, "Five billion non-Christians can't be wrong") and is even open to atheists' freely expressed views. What truly -- and sometimes comically -- enhances the discussion, though, is the frequent and clever device of interviewing actors in full dress, who express generally modern views of God while in ancient-looking garb, thus underlining that these are questions not only big in size, but as old as time.
The visual bridges between topics teeter on the purely pretentious, featuring a white half-wolf, half-dog wandering the crimson-colored streets and hills around Matera. At too many points during these passages, the fine video lensing tends toward merely pretty pictures, but a passage showing the animal hesitating and then finally crossing a small bridge becomes effectively symbolic.
Camera (Blue Video color, DV), Cabras, Molinari; editors, Molinari, Francesco Struffi; music, Molinari; additional music, Kamal Sabri, Enkh Jargal , Khaoticos, Maurizio Iorio ; sound, Alessio Costantino; associate producer, Valeria Leonardi; assistant directors, Nando Irene , Simone Spinazze ; second unit director, Francesco G. Raganato; second unit camera, Raganato. Reviewed at AFI Film Festival, Los Angeles, Nov. 8, 2004. (Also in Turin Film Festival.)  Running time: 66 MIN.
 


Love it or hate it, Mel Gibson 's The Passion of the Christ  is one of the few culturally essential American movies of recent years, a genuine phenomenon that found a huge audience without the bludgeon of an eight-figure advertising budget. Shot in 2003 on the set of Passion , Francesco Cabras  and Alberto Molinari 's The Big Question  asks members of the film's multinational, multireligious cast and crew a dozen "universal" questions on the nature of the divine: Who is God to you? How do you pray? What happens after life?
Unfortunately, while the questions may be universal, they're not particularly original, and the responses largely run the expected range, rendering the whole project less enlightening than your average collegiate coffee-and-cigarettes bull session. The individual clips are kept brief throughout, creating a monotonous rhythm (which musical interludes featuring a mysterious white dog do little to alleviate) and reflecting a dubious methodology that privileges quick, punchy responses over sustained reasoning. (Cabras and Molinari claim to have sought answers "devoid of superstructures," but of course it's precisely these pre-existing religious forms that govern most  people's views on spiritual questions.)
In a striking departure from the DV ugliness that's become the documentary norm, The Big Question  is beautifully lit and shot, no doubt in an attempt to impose some cinematic texture on decidedly noncinematic subject matter. Many performers appear in costume and makeup—most strikingly Jim Caviezel , who shows up briefly in full-on scourging mode—but there's precious little effort to connect the questions asked here with the answers suggested by Gibson's film (never discussed in detail); indeed, Cabras and Molinari squander a golden opportunity to produce a spiritually oriented variation on the lightweight making-of genre. What emerges instead is an unlikely lesson in the Hollywood  star system—the film's refusal to ID any of the interviewees has the perverse effect of emphasizing the few faces we already know, and viewers may catch themselves wondering when Gibson will show up next.
