This spoof of sports biopics stars Rob Corddry, best known as a correspondent for Comedy Central's "Daily Show With Jon Stewart." In "Blackballed," Mr. Corddry plays Bobby Dukes, a paintball legend who goes missing after a scandalous "wiping" incident (sprayed with paint by the opposing team, he wipes off the evidence and continues playing, to the shock of the entire paintball community.) Ten years later, Bobby resurfaces to prove himself in the Hudson Valley Paintball Classic. But will he be able to live down his disgrace in the eyes of his fellow paintballers, including Lenny Pear (Paul Scheer), the referee who caught him cheating all those years ago? Hastily shot on digital video, "Blackballed" is essentially an extended improvisational skit, with a troupe of comics riffing on a central joke (the elevation of paintball to a noble calling). Many cast members, including Mr. Corddry, are veterans of the Upright Citizens Brigade comedy team. The story is told in faux-documentary style, echoing the films of Christopher Guest, and if the cast never quite matches Mr. Guest's ensemble in comic inventiveness, they nonetheless manage to invest a very slight story line with a loose, scruffy charm.

The influence of Christopher Guest is felt throughout "Blackballed: The Bobby Dukes Story," a mildly amusing mockumentary about a disgraced paintball champ who wants one more shot. Shattershot comedy pales in comparison with "Best in Show" and "Waiting for Guffman," but still manages a fair share of chuckles and a few belly laughs. Two years after appearing on the fest circuit, pic finally kicks off a theatrical run April 13 at New York's Two Boots Pioneer Theater. Delayed release might work in its favor, given lead player Rob Corddry's increased exposure as a "correspondent" for Comedy Central's "The Daily Show." 
Alternating between staged interviews and faux cinema verite, "Blackballed" charts the comeback trail traveled by Bobby Dukes (Corddry), an ace paintballer who was caught trying to wipe the paint from his jersey after being struck by an opponent during the 1993 Hudson Valley Paintball Classic. Unfortunately, his efforts did not go unnoticed. (A nice touch: The shameful event is re-created with He-Man action figures during an ever-so-solemn prologue.)
After 10 years of self-exile, Bobby returns to Hudson Valley to reclaim his former title. He seeks guidance from a gung-ho paintball coach (DJ Hazard), then assembles a makeshift team that includes a dreamy hippie (Seth Morris), a vidgame addict (Curtis Gwinn), a bellicose ex-Marine (Rob Riggle) and, ironically, the geeky ref (Paul Scheer) who exposed Bobby a decade ago. Erika (Dannah Feinglass), Bobby's sweetly dippy sister, serves as backup player and, more important, uniform designer.
Working from a scenario he contrived with Brian Steinberg, helmer Brant Sersen gives his actors plenty of time and room to expand and embellish their characters through extended improvisation. Unfortunately, there are a few too many stretches where inspiration is in short supply, and the ensemble simply treads water between truly funny bits.
On the plus side, Corddry effectively underplays while neatly balancing satire and seriousness, serving as the pic's center of gravity while the other co-stars (most notably, Hazard and Riggle) go over the top to get big laughs. A preliminary match-up against a Canadian paintball team has an enjoyably lunatic edge. And the deliberately jittery hand-held lensing enhances the mockery in this mockumentary.

More suited to the short form, Rob Corddry 's brand of faux-unwitting sarcasm is pushed to the limit by Blackballed: The Bobby Dukes  Story , a mockumentary that exhausts its best joke with its premise: Legendary paintball player Bobby Dukes  (Corddry) attempts a comeback 10 years after getting expelled for "wiping"—the paintball equivalent of taking a mulligan. (As a colleague played by fellow Daily Show   correspondent Ed Helms  puts it, "You put a pretty big shit stain on the entire sport.") Now bald and allegedly reformed, with old friends shying away ("I would take a bullet for you—I just can't take a paint bullet for you"), Bobby is forced to tap the dregs of the paintball world for his new team: a referee (Paul Scheer ), a video game addict (Curtis Gwinn ), and a demented control freak (Rob Riggle ), who seems to think paintball is genuine blood sport.
What keeps Blackballed  from the glories of the Christopher Guest  oeuvre may be the subject itself: Rock bands, regional theater, dog shows, and folk music all suggest a variety of avenues and characters, whereas paintball lacks the subtext—and is too funny on its own—to allow the improv cast significant wiggle room. (What's next—a miniature-golf version of Caddyshack ?) The movie hits its targets occasionally, as when Bobby's team goes up against a platoon of gangsta-rapping Canadians, or Bobby and his nemesis (Rob Huebel ) argue, per Ghostbusters , about whether it's OK to cross the paint streams. Nor is the film—which has fun mimicking the handheld camerawork of vérité and reality TV—visually indifferent, although shooting the tedious paintball matches in the manner of Private Ryan 's Omaha Beach  landing is a gag that gets old fast. Blurbsters on Rotten Tomatoes  will say it's hit-and-miss—and they'll be right.
