 Julie Gavras’s wonderful film, “Blame It on Fidel,” is a deeply political movie that sidesteps strident polemics by viewing the ideological conflicts within a French-Spanish family through the eyes of a smart, willful child. As the daily life of 9-year-old Anna (Nina Kervel) is drastically revised after her parents, Fernando and Marie de la Mesa, suddenly become radicals, she resists change with the ferocious determination of a youngster who is told that she must part with her favorite toys.  The movie, adapted from a novel by the Italian writer Domitilla Calamai and set in France, begins in 1970 and spans Anna’s school year, then leaps to 1973. It perfectly recreates the excitement of a time when many in the bourgeoisie forsook comfortable lives to dive headlong into radical activism. In the case of the de la Mesas, that commitment entails adopting a much sparer lifestyle, closer to that of their political cohort.  Anna’s father (Stefano Accorsi), a lawyer from an upper-class Spanish family, devotes his professional skills to serving a group of scruffy  left-wing Chilean exiles as they campaign (in absentia) for the election of Salvador Allende as Chile’s president. Marie (Julie Depardieu, daughter of Gérard), a French magazine writer turned devout feminist, works in a family-planning clinic, demonstrates for abortion rights and publishes a book of interviews.  “Blame It on Fidel” is not the pie-in-the-sky paean to its do-gooders that you might expect from the daughter of the left-wing filmmaker Costa-Gavras (it is her first feature film; she has made documentaries), and the de la Mesas don’t metamorphose into a harmonious  Radical Supercouple.  The strains on the couple’s marriage culminate with a brutal domestic battle in which Marie’s feminism clashes with her husband’s unwitting male supremacism, and everything the couple believe is called into question.  Each minute fluctuation in the household’s political weather registers poignantly on Anna’s visage as she tries to grasp events she barely comprehends. Ms. Kervel, her grave, intelligent features scrunched into a worried frown throughout much of the movie, is a marvel. By any measure it is a great performance by a child actor; the movie belongs to Ms. Kervel.  It is a tumultuous year. Among other events, Charles de Gaulle, the hero of Anna’s grandparents, dies; Mr. Allende is elected Chile’s president; and 300 prominent Frenchwomen risk prosecution by signing a petition declaring that they have had abortions.  Though sympathetic to Fernando and Marie’s sudden left turn, the movie is equally sympathetic to Anna, who, with her younger brother, François (Benjamin Feuillet), is dragged along on her parents’ political odyssey. Anna finds herself unceremoniously pulled out of her divinity class at her Roman Catholic girls’ school. Her father informs her that Mickey Mouse is a fascist. When her best friend, Cécile, visits the de la Mesas’ shabby new home, Cécile loathes their simple peasant food and is horrified at Fernando’s casual nudity in front of his children.  The de la Mesas’ political shift is not impetuous. For years Fernando has lived uneasily with the knowledge of his family’s close relationship with the Franco regime. His decision is prompted by an anguished visit from his sister Marga after Marga’s husband, a Communist and the black sheep of the family, is arrested for anti-Franco activities. Leaving Anna with her maternal grandparents in Bordeaux, Fernando and Marie travel to Chile and return charged with radical fervor.  Anna is baffled by these political and cultural crosscurrents. Her beloved nanny, Filomena (Marie-Noëlle Bordeaux), a Cuban exile who lost everything in  Castro’s revolution, regales Anna with her hatred of Communists. After Filomena is dismissed, Anna’s new Greek nanny and then another nanny, from Vietnam, bombard her with creation myths that clash with her strict Roman Catholic education.  In the movie’s tensest scene, Anna’s parents take her to a demonstration that is broken up by riot police tossing smoke bombs. When panic erupts, you fear that the befuddled girl, who barely comes up to her parents’ waists, will be trampled or lost in the melee.  Over time Anna absorbs whatever information makes sense to her. (Because he’s younger, her brother adapts to the changes much more readily.) When a Chilean exile peels an orange and patiently explains to Anna that some people want the fruit all to themselves, while others believe in sharing it, and then hands her a section, she has a glimpse of insight.  Meanwhile, her doting conservative grandparents hold their tongues when she visits them. “Blame It on Fidel” offers convincing, kindhearted portraits of loving relatives on opposing sides of the political spectrum acting responsibly for the sake of a child.

A smart little girl's bourgeois certainties are subjected to the upheaval of her parents' abrupt political activism in "Blame It on Fidel." Wonderfully engaging look at 1970-71 from a child's p.o.v. is a splendidly cast trip back to a time when French women had not yet won the right to legal abortion and the redistribution of wealth in Chile and beyond seemed possible if only enough like-minded people took to the streets with militant fervor. Fiction debut by Julie Gavras (daughter of Costa) makes the political personal with a light, painless touch that should translate into offshore niche play. 
Winner of the MPA's Michel D'Ornano Prize for a promising first French film, pic world-preemed at Deauville before a Nov. 29 bow in Gaul.
Prim and proper 9-year-old Anna (Nina Kervel) smugly demonstrates her ability to cut a piece of fruit just-so with a knife and fork at the kiddie table at a wedding. At Catholic girls' school, she revels in her excellent grades and adores catechism class. Anna lives in a spacious house with father Fernando (Stefano Accorsi), a lawyer from a wealthy Spanish family; mother Marie (Julie Depardieu), who writes for a popular French women's mag, and younger brother Francois (Benjamin Feuillet).
Fernando has just smuggled his sister and her daughter out of Spain where the sister's Communist militancy was too dangerous. Housekeeper Filomena (Marie-Noelle Bordeaux), however, doesn't appreciate the guests insofar as she's a Cuban exile who lost everything because of Castro.
Anna gathers that Commies are bad, so becomes confused when her parents decide to trade their house, garden and servant for a much smaller apartment after a trip to Latin America puts their social consciences in overdrive.
Their new home is suddenly overrun with bearded revolutionaries discovering the glories of collective action into the wee hours. Impeccable hair-dos and tailored clothes give way to colorful hippie garb. Marie starts tape recording wrenching testimony for a book on how women suffer from the unavailability of legal abortion.
Pic's humor and poignancy is in Anna's struggle to assimilate so much new information that flies in the face of her former routine. Dad forbids her to read "fascist" Mickey Mouse comics. A street demonstration broken up by smoke bombs and riot police is particularly well depicted from Anna's low-to-the-ground position in the crowd.
Time frame from September 1970 to September 1971 is packed with history with a capital H: Charles De Gaulle's death, the watershed petition signed by more than 300 prominent French women admitting they'd undergone illegal abortions, Salvador Allende's election. Big events are intelligently integrated into the storytelling building blocks of class, nationality, gender, religion and dedication to a cause bigger than oneself.
The book from which the pic is adapted showed the early 1970s from an Italian girl's p.o.v.; the switch to France is seamless and accomplished. Helmer elicits a resonant and memorable perf from appealingly precocious Kervel as Anna. Production design is tops and score is heard just enough.
 Camera (color, widescreen), Nathalie Durand; editor, Pauline Dairou; music, Aramnd Amar; production designer, Laurent Deroo; costume designer, Annie Thiellement; sound (Dolby), Nicolas Naegelen; assistant director, Alain Artur; casting, Coralie Amedeo. Reviewed at Dames Augustins screening room, Neuilly sur Seine, France, July 28, 2006. (In Deauville Film Festival -- non-competing.) Running time: 98 MIN.

 


 
 


      

While her friends play cops and robbers, broodingly precocious nine-year-old Anna (Nina Kervel ) is asked by younger brother François to play "Allende and Franco," the late Chilean president and notorious Socialist being the "good guy." Adapted from an Italian novel by Domitilla Calamai , this delightful debut feature from Julie Gavras  (daughter of filmmaker Costa-Gavras ) observes a comfy bourgeois couple (Julie Depardieu  and Stefano Accorsi ) in early-'70s Paris and their abrupt ideological awakening to Communist militancy through daughter Anna's curious, opinionated, innocently conservative viewpoint. Unforced in its tenderness and wit, the film lightly addresses the era's incendiary revolutions through the girl's developing filters without oversimplifying the complex politics. Gavras's style is already as assured as her father's, and her ability to balance the audience's understanding of grown-up beliefs with that of a rapidly maturing girl is deft. However, the real treasure here is newcomer Kervel, a child superstar in the making. Watch her expressions change as she's taught about abortion; to someone who still refers to genitals as either "dickies" or "duckies," hers is a realization made all the more mind-blowing through subtlety.
