 Don and Janna are a longtime couple — we know this from the narration of their unseen daughter — who periodically meet in a bar, pretending to be strangers. They take turns placing personal ads that lead to bouts of melancholy play-acting and occasional humor, as they explore alternative personalities and possibilities. They try out being younger, sexier, more ambitious, more carefree, and their encounters make up Stanley Tucci’s “Blind Date.”  Perhaps the most interesting thing about Don and Janna is that they are played by Mr. Tucci and Patricia Clarkson, two wonderful actors who tend to take smaller roles in bigger movies. They filmed “Blind Date” on a single set two years ago, and while it does not quite work as psychological inquiry or cogent drama, it is an interesting project. The film was based, loosely but loyally, on an earlier movie by Theo van Gogh, the Dutch filmmaker who was murdered by a Muslim extremist in 2004.  “Blind Date” is one of several American films to pay Mr. van Gogh the homage of a remake — the best known is Steve Buscemi’s “Interview,” a more fully realized work — but it’s hard not to conclude that something has been lost in the translation. The self-consciousness of the premise and the playlike structure of “Blind Date” clash with the naturalism of Mr. Tucci and Ms. Clarkson’s acting styles, and the film never lifts itself above its origin as a well-meaning, underdeveloped exercise.

The old barker's pitch "you'll laugh, you'll cry" is literally true about "Blind Date," a sometimes hilarious, often wrenching pas de deux between actors Stanley Tucci and Patricia Clarkson, and as much of an experimental film as anything else showing at the Sundance Film Festival. The experiment involves emotions and equilibrium -- keeping an audience off balance while zoning in precisely on the feelings of two very complicated characters. Popularity of the two stars could make the film an arthouse hit; they're a joy to watch. However, helmer Tucci's ambitious, sophisticated experiment could dampen reactions -- such is the fate of art. 
The second in three remakes of films by the murdered Dutch director Theo van Gogh (the first was Steve Buscemi's "Interview"), "Blind Date" is about a married couple, Don (Tucci) and Janna (Clarkson) who, as we learn via voiceover, "play games with each other."
The games involve responding to each others' personal ads in a designated role -- after "Serious Reporter Seeks Aggressive Woman" appears in the paper, Janna walks into their customary meeting place, punches Don in the stomach and throws a drink in his face.
Not all the role-playing is so overt, but the struggle for the couple to connect through alternative realities is always poignant, and sometimes purely comic: When Don appears as a blind man, his antics with the white stick have Clarkson in stitches, and they seem to be real.
The comedy of pain -- not of the "Jackass" species, but the silent-film, and even vaudeville variety -- haunts "Blind Date." Part of Don's magic act -- in the nightclub/bar where he and Janna meet, he performs as a "conjurer" -- involves him pulling things out of his fly, the way Harpo Marx used to pull things out of his overcoat. From the moment Janna, a bruised flower, talks about the inherent humor in other people's misfortune, the stock elements of baggy-pants comedy are made highly modern, even Beckettian. Don and Janna are trying to conjure love, and it isn't working.
That the opening credits unroll atop a slow survey of Don's bar -- the wood, the liquor, by implication the artifice of nightlife -- may be a ref to Tucci's "Big Night," but it also recalls his utter confidence in the power of camera movement and its ability to transfix an audience regardless of what story it's telling.
Tucci initially appears as a magician, but also a mime: No talk is necessary for him to get our attention (even if the explanatory voiceover is giving up some facts). Only later, when Janna enters the picture, and the two engage in the tortured performances each brings to the bar, do we see what Chaplin told us at the end of "City Lights" -- that the true feelings of damaged people's hearts are imprisoned by language, and persona.
Humor, like a prism, concentrates the heat of melancholy in "Blind Date" until it burns. The film may not be everyone's cup of love potion, but it certainly has vision.

In honor of Dutch provocateur Theo van Gogh —who was murdered in 2004 by an Islamic extremist, angered by one of his films—Van Gogh's producers initiated an English-language trilogy of remakes based on his early two-handers. Steve Buscemi 's Interview  was canned and limp. Next at bat is director and star Stanley Tucci 's Blind Date , which similarly suffers from the restrictions of the project (it's overly faithful to the original and to Van Gogh's preferred three-camera setup). Tucci and Patricia Clarkson  share a bruised chemistry as an estranged couple bound by grief and anger over the death of their young daughter. In a bizarre ritual more torturous than cathartic (insert Antichrist  joke here), the two meet regularly at Tucci's dingy cabaret and role-play blind dates, their improvised characters admitting painful truths in the margins of conversation each night. Co-adapted by Tucci and Interview 's David Schechter , the dialogue isn't nearly as slippery as the stop-on-a-dime spins between melancholy, misanthropy, and disarming humor in Clarkson and Tucci's deliveries—but the actors chase the text like a chew toy anyway. Stagey pacing and unnecessary magic-realist voiceover aside, the film's ultimate failure as moving melodrama is that we experience these two acting as a dance partner, a reporter—even a blind man—but we never get who they really are, beyond grieving parents.
