 Every so often in his slow-to-boil, hard-to-shake drama “Blind Mountain,” the Chinese director Li Yang slips in a moment of beauty — a blooming valley wreathed in mist, a shepherd tending his flock — of the sort you find in glossy travel magazines. These pastoral visions initially feel like a reprieve, a respite from the story’s increasing heaviness, but there’s something about these bucolic images that begins to gnaw at you too. This native,  touristic fantasy about the unspoiled China, you realize, comes with a brutal price tag.  The brutality arrives swiftly, without pity. The film opens with a young, perilously open-faced college graduate, Bai Xuemei — sensitively played by Huang Lu — traveling with a pair of smiling strangers. Anxious to help her parents out of debt, Bai believes that she and the strangers will be buying medicinal herbs that they can profitably sell elsewhere. After a series of terse scenes that almost fling you from a  bus to a hotel to a cafe, the travelers arrive on a windy country road in a puttering, three-wheeled van that finally deposits them in a tiny mountainside village. It’s there, after a rush of welcoming smiles, gentle murmurs, discreet handshakes and a calamitous cup of tea, that Bai suddenly finds herself in captivity.  As female horror stories go, it doesn’t get much worse than this, though it takes a while for the absolute worst to materialize in “Blind Mountain.” To her shock, Bai discovers that she has been sold to a small farming family that has bought her as casually as it does piglets. Locked inside a room with barred windows and a dirt floor, her identification papers missing, the family’s cretinous son lurking, Bai fiercely resists, at first with incredulity, then rage. Her screams are answered with a gag; her sprints to freedom lead her into chains. She lashes out. She begs and bargains; the family keeps feeding her; she keeps feeding the pigs. All women go through this, says the family’s mother, clucking sympathy while she holds Bai down.  This is the second feature from Mr. Li, who first hit the international scene in 2003 with “Blind Shaft,” a throat-gripping, pulpy thriller about a couple of grifters as ruthless as any cooked up by Jim Thompson. In that film  lowlifes roam from one illegal mine to the next, knocking off innocent laborers for insurance payouts. Tough and stripped to the narrative bone, “Blind Shaft” has a tighter, faster feel than this new film, in large part because it’s about men who make (bad) things happen in the world, while “Blind Mountain” hinges on a woman whose imprisonment — conveyed through claustrophobic rooms and taunting landscapes framed by windows and doors — paradoxically helps hobble the storytelling.  Villains like those in “Blind Shaft” do eye-catching stuff — they act, they murder — stuff that’s inherently interesting, even cinematic. It’s much more difficult to pull an audience into a story about a woman who waits or is kept behind, which is why the camera tends to follow the cowboy into the plain, the cop into the field. In “Blind Mountain” Bai’s attempts to break free give the story momentum, a pulse that slows whenever she pauses to catch her breath. Yet while there’s something terribly frustrating about her stop-and-go motion, this sense of irritation, of feeling bound by and to the story, is the point. Some captivity stories abandon the captive for the captor or the rescuer: they get out of prison fast. Not this one.  On occasion Mr. Li’s editing feels overly rushed, almost as if he were in a hurry to share the kind of story that, for the most part, tends to be drowned out by upbeat reports about China’s economic growth. Somewhat eerily, three weeks after “Blind Mountain” had its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2007, the news broke about a brick-making factory where hundreds of workers, many of them children, had been kept in slavelike conditions.  This true-crime shocker led to a flurry of reports that recounted the usual rituals of official outrage and condemnation, and then it was back to politics and business as usual. “Blind Mountain” is a coda to that story, as well as a reminder that art sometimes keeps the truth alive far better than the news.

Take a quietly scenic Chinese background, a large helping of backward peasant stereotypes and stir in (very slowly) the socially pertinent theme of sold-off brides and you have "Blind Mountain," a shake 'n'bake meal that's instant fest fodder. Low on drama and originality, and high on deja vu, sophomore outing by writer-director Li Yang ("Blind Shaft," 2003) could still find a limited arthouse audience, especially in occidental markets that respond to social portraits of mainland Chinese backwardness.
Whether one responds or not to the pic's (certainly valid) theme -- story is set in the early '90s but could equally take place nowadays in many far-flung areas of China -- pic has a deadening lack of dramatic development and a plethora of thinly drawn characters. Most of the action, and the story's potentially interesting developments, take place during the final reel, which then abruptly ends with a facile, grandstanding finish just when things are getting interesting.
Setting is a remote region somewhere in northern China, where perky student Bai Xuemei (Beijing Film Academy student Huang Lu) has come to earn money to help her family. Traveling to a tiny village in a mountain-ringed valley with the manager of a herbal medicine company, she wakes up the following day to find herself abandoned and sold off for 7,000 yuan as a bride to the son, Huang Degui (Yang Youan), of one of the families. Much later, it's revealed she was drugged.
Protesting, Xuemei is told by Degui, "Give me back the money (a sizable amount for a peasant family) and you can leave if you want." But sans coin, Xuemei finds herself held captive, forcibly held down by Degui's parents (Jia Yinggao, Zhang Yuling) while he has his way, and told by other sold-off brides in the village that it's best to adapt to the status quo.
After several failed attempts at running away -- all defeated by the community's solidarity -- Xuemei knuckles down for the time being, and forms a friendship with Degui's cousin, Decheng (He Yunle), a kindly young teacher who seems to offer a potential chance of escape. Their friendship turns into something more, but both have separate agendas.
Attractively but realistically lensed by Taiwanese d.p. Jong Lin ("Eat Drink Man Woman") in the Qinling Mountains near Xi'an, Shaanxi province, film touches most of the bases of Mainland rural dramas of the past 20 years: rural practicality, lack of education, strong community solidarity, the passing of the seasons. Perfs by the local, non-pro cast are all right as far as Li's script goes, which is not very far. Family and villagers are one-note taciturn and money-obsessed, while Huang's Xuemei is largely sullen, the only gimpses into her character provided at the start and in occasional later chats with Decheng.
Absence of music, aside from local ditties, accentuates the hard-scrabble rural atmosphere but also underlines the fact that there's little emotional underpinning to the rote story.
Camera (color), Jong Lin; editors, Li, Mary Stephen; art direction, Shu Yang; costumes, Liu Yi; sound (Dolby SRD), Dong Xu, Zhang Jia; associate producers, Fang Li, Lu Wei. Reviewed at Cannes Film Festival (Un Certain Regard), May 20, 2007. Running time: 102 MIN.
 


That the play must please is the most obvious truism in show business. But what about those aggressive modern works designed to affront the audience? The surrealist chestnut, Un Chien Andalou , was probably the first movie so conceived; it remains one of the successful because its 16 minutes of baffling insult are pithy, inventive, and comic. Austrian filmmaker Michael Haneke 's Funny Games —a scene for scene, if not word for word, remake of the director's 1997 German-language film, also called Funny Games —is none of these.
Briefly described, Funny Games  presents the ultimate bourgeois nightmare. A picture-perfect family retreats to their comfortable, gated, lakeside house and, before there's even time to restock the fridge, find themselves beset by a pair of clownish trespassers. Dressed in tennis whites, the lads swiftly evolve from innocuous preppies to annoying pests to gleeful psychopaths, holding the family captive and torturing them, presumably for our delectation. As Haneke makes clear in his press notes, Funny Games  was always intended for an American audience: "It is a reaction to a certain American Cinema, its violence, its naïveté, the way [it] toys with human beings."
Right on! Funny Game s is not without a certain artistry. An image of one captor idly channel-surfing with his lissome captive bound and gagged on a couch beside the large-screen television set has the bored depravity of an Eric Fischl  bedroom painting. But for all the laughs it pretends to laugh, Haneke's movie is essentially founded on the programmatic denial of catharsis. "I want the spectator to think," he's been quoted as saying—although with regard to Funny Games , his hope seems as touchingly utopian as the notion that an illiterate might teach people to read. (In any case, the American audience whom Haneke seeks to address is less apt to see Funny Games  as a critique of dominant cinema than an argument for personal handguns.)
As enacted by Tim Roth , little Devon Gearhart , and especially co-executive producer Naomi Watts , the family's suffering seems naturalistic enough. They are recognizable people, while their scarifying captors (in this version, Michael Pitt  and Brady Corbet ) are deliberate ciphers who anticipate the implacably murderous, Oscar-winning  joker created by Javier Bardem  in No Country for Old Men . As suggested by their cartoon nicknames (Tom and Jerry, Beavis and Butt-head ), their white Mickey Mouse  gloves, and the fun they have inventing motives for their inexplicable antics—not to mention their occasional asides to the audience—Haneke's villains are blatant textual effects. (As a strict exponent of unpleasure, however, Haneke will permit none of the narrative thrills the Coens provide in their funny games.)
Everything is calculated. Self-consciously manipulating conventions more or less invented by D.W. Griffith  in the days of the nickelodeon, Funny Games  is what a German might call a "devilish trick," or schelmenstreich . But, unlike other prankster showmen—the names Lars von Trier  and Carlos Reygadas  cavort to mind—Haneke is pretty much a humorless pedant. I did admire his adaptation of The Piano Teacher , thanks largely to Isabelle Huppert 's bravura performance, although, reading Elfriede Jelinek 's novel, I was surprised to discover that it was actually comic. Thus, Das Funnygame   is a very severe schelmenstreich . The movie's early emphasis on the family's innocent, time-killing competitions is preparation for the joyless sport Haneke will have with the spectator.
Without ever acknowledging his own sadism, Haneke self-righteously lays his aesthetic and moral cards on the table. The use of music—largely a blast of John Zorn  neo-punk noise—is anything but subliminal. The violence is all imaginary, a factor of clever editing, precise camera placement, and the power of suggestion. Moreover, its sickening escalation is rigorously based on the host family's lack of "manners." The wife loses her temper with the visitors well before anything bad really happens; her husband strikes the first blow; their child fires the first shot. Everything is, of course, returned in spades.
Perhaps these victims deserve their fate. One of the movie's persistent ironies is that the family is a victim of their insistence on bourgeois property rights. Their own toys are inevitably turned against them as weapons: More than once, they are trapped by their own fancy security system. Funny Games  is nothing if not a punitive movie—and once Herr Haneke gets you to admit your own bloodlust, he's got you.
Funny Games  is ultimately about forcing the viewer to confront his or her expectations. Would you enjoy seeing a terrified, helpless, half-naked woman? (The remake's major concession to the American market is a long scene of Naomi Watts hopping around in her underwear; in the original, the wife is clothed.) Are you getting bored? Isn't it about time for something to happen? Do you want to see the worm turn? Or simply wish the movie would end? Professional obligations required that I endure it, but there's no reason why you should.

Rabble-rousing as it often is, Film Forum's new Chinese feature, Blind Mountain , easily fits the paradigm parodied by Funny Games . The difference: This movie actually has a political point.
