 I’m fairly certain one reason that the French director Olivier Assayas made “Boarding Gate” is that he wanted to watch the Italian actress Asia Argento strut around in black underwear and punishing heels. And why not? Ms. Argento looks delectable if somewhat demented in “Boarding Gate,” in which she comes across as a postmodern Pearl White, who starred in silent adventure serials like “The Perils of Pauline.” Ms. Argento seems to invite trouble, and Mr. Assayas, who has a way of capturing the seemingly ineffable, has a thing for troubled, troubling women.  “Boarding Gate,” a casually beautiful, preposterously plotted, elliptical thriller, earned little love last year when it played at the Cannes Film Festival, where it was shown out of competition. It didn’t do much for Mr. Assayas’s reputation, at least among some critics, who had been just as eager to dismiss his other recent films, among them “Clean” (2004) and the much-maligned “demonlover” (2002). What “Boarding Gate” did do was reconfirm Ms. Argento as one of contemporary cinema’s most fascinating creatures. Her on-screen ferocity is now generating as much interest as her tattoos — an angel hovers above her pubic bone, and an eye stares out from one shoulder — or the ease with which she sheds her clothes, which explains why I can describe those tattoos with confidence.  In truth, thriller is a convenient but imprecise descriptor for “Boarding Gate,” which resists categorization despite Mr. Assayas’s stated insistence that he was trying (really) to make a B movie in English. Much like “demonlover” this new film plays with various genre codes and conventions — the femme fatale, violence, murder, an atmosphere of danger and dread — but plays with them very differently than most run-of-the-mill modern thrillers. Indeed both films depend on your having at least a passing familiarity with the kind of anonymously produced slick flicks — slickly packaged, slicked with blood — that are an industry staple from Hollywood to Hong Kong. You may not remember the names of these industrial entertainments, but they’re invariably playing on a screen near you.  Despite Mr. Assayas’s interest in genre there is something in him that either rebels against the obvious or is simply incapable of delivering the same-old, same-old movie-packaged fun and death. It seems fitting then that the first and final images in “Boarding Gate” are so blurred you can’t tell what you’re looking at. Yet even after the opening image comes into focus —  two men fire guns at an indoor shooting range — you realize you still don’t know what you’re watching. Seeing is believing (something, sometimes), but seeing isn’t knowing, Mr. Assayas likes to remind us. And so in “Boarding Gate” he racks up one eye-catching incident after another (involving sadomasochistic sex, pooling blood and smuggled drugs) that swirl on screen with little apparent connection.  It’s actually easy to make story sense of “Boarding Gate” if you go with Mr. Assayas’s oblique strategies. Ms. Argento is Sandra, the former lover of a shifty, financially struggling American businessman, Miles (Michael Madsen), who lives, works and plays rough in Paris. An ex-prostitute, Sandra wants to make a new life running a club in Beijing, but she needs money, which leads her back to Miles as well as to a shady couple, Lester and Sue (Carl Ng and Kelly Lin). Murder and mystery lead Sandra to Hong Kong where guns are drawn and discharged. At one point Kim Gordon, the frontwoman for Sonic Youth, shows up, barking orders in Cantonese,  a moment of delirium in what has become an increasingly unhinged enterprise.  In “demonlover,” which involves corporate intrigue and pornography, sex is a commodity and a spectacle, a means of control and a weapon of power. Business transactions resemble mating rituals, and sexual encounters are as erotic as watching traders skirmish at the Stock Exchange. The sex in “Boarding Gate” is more complicated, partly because Sandra isn’t just a conduit for Mr. Assayas’s ideas — she isn’t simply another of cinema’s overdetermined whores — but also an identifiably real, cringingly human character. “Demonlover,” with its sleek surfaces, slippery ideas and pulp flourishes, is a perfect critical object. But “Boarding Gate,” despite its periodic and self-conscious outlandishness, feels much more tethered to  lived experience, which is Mr. Assayas’s great subject.  It can be easy to overlook this investment in real life, but only because the shiny surfaces of his films, with their excesses and putatively exotic locales, are so beguiling and even distracting. “Boarding Gate” certainly offers plenty of visual distractions, the image of Ms. Argento getting down and dirty with Mr. Madsen included. And there is no question that Mr. Assayas, a former film critic for Cahiers du Cinéma, knows full well the commercial value of female nudity and not just its aesthetic charm. That said, even in “Boarding Gate,” a modestly scaled, self-consciously tawdry exercise in genre appropriation, Mr. Assayas manages to say more about what it is to be human — to desire, to fear, to be alone — than most filmmakers say in a lifetime.  As always, it’s easy to be dazzled by Mr. Assayas’s camerawork — the way he catches a person’s movement as well as the volition behind that movement — but watching “Boarding Gate” I was again struck by how he uses music to amplify reality, almost as if he were inviting you to listen to the songs playing in other people’s heads. His use of Brian Eno here is particularly potent. Mr. Eno creates music that drifts around you, enveloping you in moods and waves of feeling, which is precisely what Mr. Assayas does as a filmmaker. Mr. Eno has said that for him making popular music is about “creating new, imaginary worlds and inviting people to join them,”  a sentiment that Mr. Assayas no doubt understands.  “Boarding Gate” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Rough sex, rougher death.

Thrills and drama are left standing on the tarmac in "Boarding Gate" a limp, sleazy inanity by renowned French critic cum erratic helmer Olivier Assayas. Aiming for an erotic thriller, this out of competition entry behaves with barely more decorum or logic than many of the straight-to-video fodder currently being ignored in the Cannes market. Helmer's profile and cult attraction of Michael Madsen and Asia Argento will garner attention, but pic is likely to follow in the footsteps of Assayas's risible "Demonlover" that left a stain on the Croisette in 2002.
 After a prolonged absence, ex-prostie Sandra (Asia Argento) makes a surprise visit to the Paris office of her ex-lover and former pimp, high-flying businessman Miles Rennberg (Michael Madsen). In between sexual overtures, hints of previous financial promises and goading confessions/accusations of past misdeeds, Sandra reveals she is pursuing her dream to own a Beijing nightclub. Miles is selling off his business to Singapore interests, and now that he is divorced, he wants to renew their defunct bondage-flavored affair, with or without the nightclub.
Though tempted by Miles' money, Sandra now has other options. During the day she has a legit job for an international import company run by husband- and-wife team Lester and Sue Wong (Carl Ng, Kelly Lin, respectively). Unknown to Lester, Sandra is also running drugs through their company. Unknown to Sue, Sandra is having an affair with Lester.
Poised above the slippery slope, Sandra is a liability for everyone who knows her once a drug deal comes undone. From yarn's one-hour mark, guns are brandished with too much frequency and too little purpose and narrative unravels into a murky mess as it spreads across to Hong Kong in the film's last 40 minutes.
Like the globetrotting of Maggie Cheung's character in the more engaging "Clean," Sandra's post-Paris adventures in Hong Kong are supposed to suggest a run toward oblivion or redemption.
However, Argento lacks the range (or the dialogue) to convincingly put her character across. Scenes between Madsen and Argento have a whiff of voyeuristic self-indulgence and run way too long, destroying possibilities of either urgency or intimacy.
Cast, whether native English speakers or not, woodenly recite their lines.
Opening and closing with a smart out-of-focus gimmick, helming is consistently solid, but script betrays Assayas' already demonstrated lack of facility with thrillers. Lensing has a cool metallic look that underlines the emotionless atmosphere. Unscored pic leans heavily on recorded music by Brian Eno. Other tech credits are pro.
Camera (color), Yorick Le Saux; editor, Luc Barnier; music, Brian Eno; production designer, Francois-Renaud Labarthe; sound, (Dolby Digital) Daniel Sobrino. Reviewed at Cannes Film Festival (noncompeting), May 18, 2007. Running time: 106 MIN.
 (English, French, Cantonese dialogue)
 


There's basically only one reason to see Olivier Assayas 's self-consciously hypermodern, meta-sleazy, English-French-Chinese-language globo-thriller Boarding Gate , and her name is Asia Argento .
An authentic daughter of darkness (child of Italian horror auteur Dario Argento ) and self-proclaimed Scarlet Diva (the title of her 2000 psychodrama), an actress who gives the impression that there's little she hasn't tried and nothing she wouldn't consider, Argento has sashayed off with nearly every movie in which she's appeared (Land of the Dead , Transylvania , Marie Antoinette  , and especially Abel Ferrara 's Go Go Tales ). She was the people's choice for Best Actress last year at Cannes  (thanks mainly to her title performance in Catherine Breillat 's The Last Mistress ), and, tricked out in stiletto heels and black undies, brandishing a Luger, and flaunting her tramp stamp, she pretty much owns the wreckage that is Boarding Gate .
Argento's Sandra—a Paris-based ex-hooker, erstwhile industrial spy, freelance drug dealer, the one-time mistress of her own sci-fi website, and an eventual hit lady—is introduced with her back to the camera and hair piled up, the better to display the "23" tattooed on the nape of her neck: Is she hot stuff or a factory second? Sandra's former lover, the capitalist swine Miles (beefy Michael Madsen ), wants out of his import-export racket and, newly divorced, would like Sandra back in his life. In one of the movie's borderline-risible set-pieces, the pair embarks on a long conversation on who used to get off on what, during the course of which Sandra, being Argento, parks the finger of her left hand in her mouth while idly exploring her crotch with the right.
Sandra, it seems, is so totally over Miles that she taunts him with a description she found in an online business journal: He's "the perfect cliché of bygone times." (Let no one say this movie is not prophetic.) Anyway, the stray cat has found a new boyfriend, a more successfully swinish import-export mogul named Lester (Carl Ng ), and even holds a day job, running Lester's warehouse with his scarily cool wife (Hong Kong star Kelly Lin  making her international debut). But our Sandra has big dreams: She's moving dope on the side, planning to buy herself a little nightclub in Beijing . When a deal goes seriously wrong, she's compelled to return to sodden Miles, hoping for a million-dollar handout.
Absurd as it sounds, Assayas's scenario is far more slapdash than slapstick, although it does allow Sandra and Miles to trip once more down memory lane. "You kept the handcuffs?" Argento whimpers in her scratchy little voice, waiting two beats to add: "I hate them, they hurt." (As an actress, Argento's line readings—typically mumbled in a toneless sultry whine—have a near-Brando eccentricity.) Thanks to Madsen's volatility and menacing bulk, a constant threat of violence darkens the scene. This time, the tryst goes way, way over the top. Suffice to say that Sandra is compelled to assume the identity of her online alter-ego, the super-heroine Vortex, and is effectively catapulted, alone and endangered, into the mad maze of Hong Kong.
With gameboy Assayas working the joystick, Boarding Gate  returns to the jagged yet posh faux-vérité style that the director introduced in his last international thriller, 2002's demonlover ; the film is a mélange of suave jump cuts, confusing close-ups and light-smearing action pans, with Sonic Youth 's ambient techno providing a measure of audio glue. More than anything else, Assayas has a feel for the routine discomforts of the new global order. (He's particularly good at evoking the stale air and cramped mise-en-scène of airplane interiors, even as his precursor Wim Wenders  doted on the now-quaint glitzy placelessness of international airports.) But unlike demonlover , Boarding Gate  has little new to offer, and Assayas's attempt to hijack and import a strobe-lit, glass-shattering, Hong Kong–style chase-cum-shootout, complete with drugged drinks and interpolated karaoke, only serves to accentuate the movie's mediocrity.
Quelle déception!  Assayas is the most versatile of mid-career French directors. He's made excellent youth films, notably Cold Water  (1994); shown a willingness to essay an Eric Rohmer –style talkathon with his Late August, Early September  (1998); demonstrated a flare for novelistic "cinema of quality" in his 2001 adaptation Les Destinées ; gone slumming with Demonlover ; and turned mawkish two scenes into the jet-setting-hipster soap opera Clean  (2004). But he has never topped the infectious cinephilia of Irma Vep  , his 1996 love letter to Maggie Chung , a movie that, by incorporating aspects of Wong Kar-Wai 's neo-new-wavism into a self-reflexive movie-about-making-a-movie, managed to be an East-meets-West triumph, the world's greatest example of nouveau neo–new wave.
Boarding Gate , like demonlover , is a nastier version of Irma Vep , protesting without much conviction a world that the filmmaker clearly enjoys. A few Boarding Gate  defenders have observed that, as pulp heroines go, Argento is far more compelling than Chung. True enough: Chung is playing a movie star in Irma Vep ; Argento, as she performs in Boarding Gate , is  a star—although, with her piercing Bette Davis  eyes and perpetual pouting smirk, she's also a look. There hasn't been so insolent a bad girl since the late-'70s punk queen Lydia Lunch , nor so bizarre a femme fatale since the pre-humanitarian Angelina Jolie . Argento is a nexus of contradiction. She's a creature of premeditated instinct, a submissive dominatrix, at once abased and triumphant.
