 Correction Appended  “Bob Funk” looks like a comedy, acts like a comedy and sounds like a comedy, but it isn’t funny. This is a problem in a movie that aims for laughs. It’s also part of the point.  “Bob Funk” has sadder things on its mind.  Written and directed by Craig Carlisle, the film stars Michael Leydon Campbell as the loudmouth, alcoholic Bob, the most disaffected employee of the family business, a high-end bedding emporium called Funk Foam and Futon. Bob straggles in with hangovers only to hit on customers or pass out. He is in, well, a funk. Mom (Grace Zabriskie) demotes him to janitor.  Everything in “Bob Funk” — characters, sets, situations  —  has a perky, glossy feel to it, the slightly heightened reality of an upscale sitcom. Mr. Carlisle adapted the material from his own play, yet it doesn’t have the stilted, suffocating atmosphere of most stage-to-screen works. It also doesn’t have a coherent point of view;  it’s pitched uneasily between affable slacker yuks that fall flat and a more sentimental agenda about Bob becoming  sober and learning life lessons.  Enter Miss Thorne (Rachel Leigh Cook), a slightly goofy but eminently lovable addition to the Funk family business and the object of Bob’s affections. Given the ham-handed nomenclature, she might just as easily  have been called Little Miss Sunshine.  “Bob Funk” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for heavy drinking, vulgar womanizing and language.
Movies-especially inconsequential, earnest comedies like Bob Funk   about how people "achieved" their sobriety-are as fascinating as listening to people recount the plot of their dreams. With all due respect to Leo Tolstoy , all unhappy film families in which someone ascends those "12 steps" are exactly alike. Though certainly not as noxious as Rachel Getting Married , Craig Carlisle 's directorial debut similarly insists that we find charm in its protagonist's most odious behavior. Self-medicating to dull the pain of a dead dad, an ex-wife, and a mom (Grace Zabriskie ) who demotes him from VP of Sales in the family-futon emporium to its custodian, the titular drunk (Michael Leydon Campbell ) rages and pukes. Mother Funk insists her son enter therapy with a woman head-shrinker, which leads to AA meetings and the pretty new associate at the office (Rachael Leigh Cook ) telling Bob, "The truth is the only thing you never have to be ashamed of." Failing as a satire of cubicle culture (Amy Ryan 's inexplicable cameo only makes you wish you were watching The Office  ) and too thin to convincingly play out its redemption story, Bob Funk , at the very least, has no scenes on how to load a dishwasher properly.
