It was 10 years ago that Troy Duffy, a nobody from nowheresville (all right, a Los Angeles bartender originally from New England), got his break when Miramax bankrolled his little Boston-set gangster movie. Then a documentary called “Overnight’’ revealed Duffy to be an abusive on-set monster. Then Miramax dumped him. Then he regrouped and made the movie on half the original budget.
The twist? “The Boondock Saints’’ turned out to be unwatchable. The twist on the twist? It found a raging cult audience anyway.
That’s all the back story you need for “The Boondock Saints II: All Saints Day,’’ a sequel you didn’t ask for but somebody must have. And the surprise is that Duffy apparently spent the last decade learning about filmmaking  - little things like where to put the camera and how to structure a scene for baseline coherence. The result isn’t art but it is an improvement: a scurrilous, lowdown, sub-Tarantino action comedy that, unlike the original, doesn’t make you want to claw your eyes out. How’s that for praise?
A recap: In the first “Boondock Saints,’’ moronic but civic-minded Irish American twin brothers Connor (Sean Patrick Flanery) and Murphy (Norman Reedus) MacManus waged holy war on Boston’s Italian gangsters with the undercover help of a gay FBI agent (Willem Dafoe) and a hit man who turned out to be the twins’ long-lost father (Billy Connolly). Were the MacManuses saints or sinners? The people of Boston couldn’t make up their minds and neither could the movie.
Dafoe is out of the picture in “All Saints Day,’’ but Connolly is still around, his gray locks flowing like Jehovah’s. He and the boys are living in placid Irish exile when a priest turns up dead in Boston, murdered in the brothers’ signature style. Someone wants them back and back they come, picking up a hyperactive third wheel named Romeo as a partner during a bare-knuckle bout on a container ship. Clifton Col lins Jr. plays this character like Speedy Gonzalez on crack, trying by sheer force of will to break through racist insult to comic inspiration. He almost makes it.
For most of its running time, “All Saints Day’’ plays like a boozy, amiably foulmouthed remedial school reunion: Here are the three stoogelike Boston detectives (Bob Marley, Brian Mahoney, and David Ferry) who aid the brothers; here’s the ghost of Rocco (David Della Rocco), the first movie’s third wheel; here’s doddery old Gerard Parkes reprising his bit as a bartender with Tourette syndrome. The Southie accents feel right even if the movie was filmed (like most of the original) in Toronto.
New characters include Julie Benz as an FBI agent with preposterous motivation and an even more preposterous Southern drawl, Peter Fonda as a mysterious mob figure, and  - up from the Brat Pack dead, the hardest working man in direct-to-DVD, ladies and gentlemen  - Judd Nelson. Nelson plays the top Mafioso in Boston, so scared of the MacManuses he lives in a panic room, and he still overacts like he just snorted a gram of powdered Brando up his cavernous nostrils.
Occasionally the movie cribs from “The Godfather, Part II’’  - even a cat can look at a king  - with flashbacks of Connolly’s character in his apprentice hit man days. To his credit, Duffy doesn’t embarrass himself with the period ambiance or the action sequences; that they’re functional represents something of a triumph. “All Saints Day’’ still feels like it was edited with a hacksaw, and the crude comic dialogue still scrapes along the barroom floor, but the general vibe is one of relaxed, murderous high spirits, and the movie’s hardly ever smug.
Why should it be? Troy Duffy proved long ago that you can make an absolutely terrible film and still find an audience. “The Boondock Saints II’’ is a reward for the faithful and no one else, an inside joke that ultimately may be on us outsiders who never played along.
.

 In 1999 you could explain Troy Duffy’s “Boondock Saints” as a cheeseball riff on “Reservoir Dogs” and “True Romance” — Quentin Tarantino meets Wayne and Garth. How to explain, a decade later, his “Boondock Saints II: All Saints Day”? Apparently the world has been waiting for another cartoonishly violent, broadly comic Boston Irish Catholic vigilante action movie with gay overtones.  Mr. Duffy has reunited an impressive share of the original cast, starting with Sean Patrick Flanery and Norman Reedus as the MacManus brothers, the slaughterhouse workers turned righteous avengers who liquidated crowds of Russian and Italian mobsters in the original. Flushed from their hideout in Ireland, they rejoin their bumbling allies on the Boston police force and ventilate some more goodfellas, this time Italian and Chinese. Sadly, Willem Dafoe’s gay F.B.I. agent is gone, replaced by Julie Benz doing a hybrid Kyra Sedgwick-Sharon Stone impression. In an indicator of Mr. Duffy’s comic sensibility, she wears a gun prominently strapped just above her crotch.  Mr. Duffy again tells his story through successive here’s-what-happened flashbacks and indulges in extreme movie love, emulating blaxploitation and Hong Kong cop films and quoting everything from “The Godfather” to “Titanic” to “Basic Instinct.” And at least a quarter of his relentless gags may make you laugh. Like its predecessor, “All Saints Day” will, if nothing else, be a cult item for Roman Catholic schoolboys; the next sequel, blatantly set up, should arrive no later than 2019.  “The Boondock Saints II: All Saints Day” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for bloody violence, language and some nudity.

Both the cult-canonized MacManus brothers and director Troy Duffy were just getting started when vigilante tale "The Boondock Saints" debuted a decade ago. But fate (in the form of the Columbine shootings) and ego (if behind-the-scenes expose "Overnight" is to be believed) intervened, sending the movie to DVD heaven and Duffy to director jail. Now, he picks up the original's open ending in "The Boondock Saints II: All Saints Day," which feels larger in scope yet sorely lacking in originality, not unlike the 10-years-on reunion special it is. The audience is there, yet the limited release suggests a homevid strategy.
Considering that die-hard fans made the first "Boondock Saints" a must-watch action movie for the college crowd, it makes sense that Duffy would craft the sequel with them in mind. As such, "All Saints Day" focuses less on bringing newcomers up to speed than in injecting all the elements that presumably made the original such a success (including the favorite cast member whose involvement Duffy has publicly denied).
The movie opens in the Irish boondocks, with brothers Connor (Sean Patrick Flanery) and Murphy (Norman Reedus) sporting big, bushy beards and playing house with Poppa M (Billy Connolly) in their remote hideaway. Though the first movie ended with the trio promising to punish criminals whom the justice system couldn't touch, they've evidently spent the past eight years trying to escape the law themselves.
When they hear that their old neighborhood priest has been executed in their signature style -- two gunshots to the back of the head and pennies on the eyes -- the boys hop on the first slow boat back to the States, making friends with a feisty Mexican fighter en route (played by Clifton Collins Jr., the brother of casting director Veronica Collins Rooney). The murder may have been a setup, but it's enough to make the mob nervous that the Saints are back in action, leading to the same mix of bumbling comedy and trigger-happy panic that permeated the original.
In place of Willem Dafoe's gay detective, we get his equally over-the-top protege, Eunice Bloom ("Dexter's" Julie Benz), introduced via extreme closeup of her stiletto heels and exaggerated walk, echoing her mentor's philosophy that the best special agents dress like tranny hookers. She also shares his crime-scene m.o., plugging her ears and re-orchestrating the events for the benefit of the three goofy detectives who aided the Saints in the first film (through a projection error, this scene, as well as the end credits, were cut short at the screening reviewed).
Duffy is a capable enough director, but no visionary -- the blue-collar version of guys like John Woo and Quentin Tarantino (who weren't exactly highbrow to begin with), mixing self-conscious theatrics with the corniest of vulgar, un-PC dialogue.
What the "Boondock Saints" series delivers -- and the ending makes it perfectly clear we can expect more of them -- is a reliably stylish, action-packed experience that reinforces the straight, white fratboy's view of himself as top of the food chain. Collins' character is an excuse for off-color Mexican jokes, and Duffy doesn't seem to recognize how including gratuitous rear nudity of the two male leads might contradict the "not in a gay way" qualifiers his characters are constantly making.
Of course, there's an appeal to such above-the-law rule-breaking, and the pic feels like a throwback to the likes of "Dirty Harry" and "Shaft." But Duffy's delusions of grandeur extend even further, with "All Saints Day" serving as his "Godfather: Part II," complete with Coppola-lite flashbacks to the incident that launched Poppa M's score-settling career.
It's all meant to come together in a big confrontation with a sinister Mafia puppetmaster called "the Roman," whose identity is not revealed until the end, but Peter Fonda's presence made little impression on viewers at a UCLA screening, while his accent merely underlined the miscasting (was Christopher Walken not available?).
The film's style mirrors that of the original, which was already late to the "Reservoir Dogs" ripoff party and feels doubly dated now, with Duffy still relying on his old trick of cranking up the heavy metal and techno music to boost excitement. Action has evolved past the slow-motion, two-guns-blazing approach seen here, though it is refreshing to take in stunts without the distraction of shaky cameras and hyperkinetic cutting.

The Boondock Saints   filmmaker Troy Duffy  certainly makes for an easy target—at least his former friends thought so when they made the 2003 doc Overnight , a rise-fall-and-turnaround portrait of Duffy's hubris and recklessness during the making of his first and only film. To his credit, not only did Duffy get his 1999 crime thriller made for less than half of the Weinsteins' promised budget, but its crippled release still found an excitable cult following from VHS to Blu-Ray. Here, then, is the inevitable sequel, and if you don't already know about the devout Irish Catholic twins McManus (Norman Reedus  and Sean Patrick Flanery ) who deliver vigilante justice to Boston's underworld with the help of a rogue FBI Special Agent, don't sweat it: That's also the plot of Boondock Saints II 's childish daydream. Willem Dafoe 's gay fed is out, replaced by his sexed-up protégée Julie Benz , and the Saints are joined by Clifton Collins Jr.  as a goofy but loyal Latino brawler who helps them find a mysterious priest killer and tries to look bad-ass while walking in slow motion. John Woo  outgrew stylizing movies like this in the '90s, but Duffy is still chasing his perfect slide-and-shoot, except now with more self-satisfied posturing, awkward pop-culture referencing, casual homophobia and racism, and the most vulgar co-opting of religious iconography this side of Dan Brown .
