
If movies were wine, "Bottle Shock" would be a pleasant varietal you'd find on the half-price shelf. Nothing fancy but tasty nonetheless: a fizzy vinho verde, maybe. Low budget, self-distributed, awkwardly charming, it's the kind of midrange Hollywood entertainment that's supposed to be extinct in this modern age. It makes you want to support your local vintner and your local moviemaker.
The subject is the celebrated "Judgment of Paris," the blind 1976 tasting in which French judges were shocked to have awarded top honors to wines made in California. The event turned the smug oenophile world upside down and inside out; overnight, France ceased to be the only place on Earth where good wine could be made and appreciated. And if grapes grown in California could bottle brilliantly, why not grapes from Chile or Australia or South Africa? Why not anywhere?
Directed by Randall Miller, "Bottle Shock" views this seismic occurrence from both sides of the Atlantic, lightly fictionalizing it into human comedy. In Paris is Steven Spurrier (Alan Rickman), a transplanted Englishman and full-time wine snob whose little shop is dying on the vine. Concocting the idea of a competition to pit French wines against international upstarts, he bribes well-known critics to serve as judges. Almost as an afterthought, a gaudy American friend (Dennis Farina) urges Steven to travel to Napa and actually try the fruits of the local vineyards. Stiffening his upper lip, Mr. Spurrier goes abroad.
Cut to dusty Chateau Montelena, one of the many vineyards run by the self-styled "hicks" of Napa. Actually, owner Bill Barrett (Bill Pullman) used to be a well-paid San Francisco lawyer, but as far as the movie is concerned he's terse and earthbound, straight out of "American Gothic." The vineyard has two mortgages against it, though, and Bill's wastrel hippie son Bo (Chris Pine) is more interested in chasing booty than filling bottles. His best friend Gustavo (Freddy Rodriguez) is a gifted vintner - in the movie's romanticized view, he's nothing short of a grape whisperer - but since he's Mexican no one takes him seriously.
The script tosses in a curvy blond wine intern (Rachael Taylor) to stir up jealousy between the friends; I have no idea if she's based on anyone real, but I guess the producers needed a babe. Taylor's fun but the least convincing scenes in "Bottle Shock" involve her sub-"Jules and Jim" romances with Bo and Gustavo, not to mention a sub-"It Happened One Night" hitchhiking sequence updated to the braless '70s.
(Actually, the movie's single least convincing aspect is Pine's hair: a flowing yellow wig that I found increasingly riveting the more I tried to ignore it. The thing nearly becomes a character in its own right.)
Thankfully, the film's backbone - that Paris contest and the anxieties and assumptions leading up to it - is just too strong to ruin, and Rickman is delightful as a prig slowly learning to bend in the California air. As Bo and Spurrier work hand in glove, the movie lifts off: When the Brit tries to get the Napa bottles to France, there's a wonderful airport scene that reveals how the democratic revolution in wine needed a democracy of people to make it happen.
More than anything else, the ambience of "Bottle Shock" seems just right: The golden sky, the black dirt, the easy hedonism of Bicentennial America as it stacks up against the Europeans' stiff complacency. The movie talks wine nicely, too, teasing the silly but useful adjectives ("complex . . . and a bit woolly," says someone after a swig) and at one point dropping a gorgeous Galileo quote: "Wine is sunlight held together by water."
"Sideways" it isn't - this movie's both shallower and cheerier by comparison - but "Bottle Shock" manages to be sunlight held together by cliches and an awful lot of affection. Bring a corkscrew and a nice runny Brie.


 “Bottle Shock,” an easygoing little movie, made with more affection than skill, takes us back to the days when men wore loud plaid suits and people who were serious about wine sneered at the very mention of California. Sticking reasonably close to the historical record, the director, Randall Miller (who wrote the screenplay with his wife, Jody Savin, and Ross Schwartz), reconstructs a watershed moment in the wine world’s acceptance of the Golden State and, eventually, of many other non-French viticultural regions.  In 1976, at a gathering near Paris, a panel of experts conducted a blind tasting at which two California wines emerged victorious over their more pedigreed French competitors. That tasting provides the climax to “Bottle Shock,” and even if the potential surprise of its outcome were not already spoiled by history, the movie’s adherence to the clichés of the triumph-of-the-underdog narrative would be enough to remove any doubt.  There are, indeed, at least two underdogs hungering for triumph. The first is Steven Spurrier, played by Alan Rickman, whose parched low voice and air of beleaguered pomposity are never unwelcome. Spurrier is a British wine dealer vainly seeking a way into the French oenological establishment. Well-trained and sensitive as his nose may be, it’s  always pressed against the glass.  The blind tasting is a stunt he cooks up with his friend Maurice (Dennis Farina), an  expatriate from Milwaukee, whose rough manner and garish clothes belie a sophisticated palate.  At Maurice’s urging, Spurrier makes his way to Napa, where Jim Barrett (Bill Pullman), a lapsed lawyer from San Francisco, fondles grapes, quotes Hemingway and tries to transform his life of bourgeois normalcy into a  Steinbeck novel. A perfectionist and something of a blowhard, Jim takes to the boxing ring to settle arguments with his long-haired son, Bo (Chris Pine).  Bo, along with his pal Gustavo (Freddy Rodriguez), who is one of Jim’s employees, and Sam (Rachael Taylor), a head-turning new intern at the vineyard, represents a new generation of irreverent countercultural wine connoisseur.  Which is cool, but “Bottle Shock” spends too much time cruising the sun-dappled California hills, tripping over potentially engaging dramatic possibilities and leaving them in the dust. An incipient love triangle involving Bo, Gustavo and Sam does not generate much intensity, though we do learn that Gustavo is a winemaker of such skill that one sip of his best red will inspire a woman to jump into bed with him. (Bo, in contrast, must fall back on his raffish surfer charm.) Gustavo’s tense relationship with Jim raises a hint of class resentment and ethnic prejudice, but this theme is no more  persuasively developed than the Oedipal conflict between Jim and Bo.  The filmmakers struggle to shoehorn a fascinating story about wine into some kind of screen genre or another. But “Bottle Shock” is unable to figure out what kind of movie it wants to be, and flops around between madcap comedy and rousing drama. To borrow a wine-snob term of art, it lacks structure. Or, to push the idiom a little further, it’s a little too sweet, with some pleasantly nutty notes and a baloney finish.  “Bottle Shock” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some swearing and sexual situations, and a lot of alcohol consumption.

A true story that only Hollywood could have made up gets the Hollywood treatment in "Bottle Shock," a peppy and quite deliberate crowd-pleaser about how a little Napa winery's 1973 Chardonnay won a major French tasting contest and sent the wine world into a tizzy. Certain to tap into many of the same sentiments that brought "Sideways" to prominence, but lacking some of Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor's refined screenwriting chops, pic will please palates across the fest world and should score sincere distrib tasters.
Working some similar easy-to-swallow storytelling angles as in his debut feature, "Marilyn Hotchkiss Ballroom Dancing & Charm School," director and co-writer Randall Miller constructs a fairly sprawling narrative that takes in the father-son pair of Jim and Bo Barrett (actual operator-owners of Chateau Montelena), an upstart Latino winemaker, a frisky love interest and a priggish yet open-minded British caviste
 in Paris who gets turned on to the California wines of the 1970s. Like a wine spread with more samples than any tongue can handle, "Bottle Shock" contains too much to manage it all well, including some painfully corny sections, but has a charming aftertaste.
Jim (Bill Pullman) owns and runs his Napa winery, Chateau Montelena, both like a common American-style farmer and a perfectionist searching for the perfect vintage of Chardonnay. His struggle for further loans to obtain the best wine presses is just one sign that business is poor in 1976, and it's no help that carefree son and would-be heir Bo (Chris Pine) lives life like he's on permanent holiday.
On the other side of the Pond, Steven Spurrier (Alan Rickman) is also struggling in his Parisian wine shop, with his only customer apparently being Yank ex-pat Maurice (an amusing Dennis Farina). Maurice notes that he's read that California wines are starting to turn heads, and Steven gets the notion to launch a French-American taste contest for the best wines in both lands, setting off to Napa-Sonoma to scout prospects.
Miller's script (co-written with wife Jody Savin and the story's original author, Ross Schwartz, who came up with the idea with Lannette Pabon) dresses up this saga of viti- and viniculture with a side plot involving Bo, cute intern Sam (Rachael Taylor) and Jim's reliable but increasingly independent-minded Gustavo (Freddy Rodriguez) in a jokey sort of love triangle. Gustavo also has his own winemaking ambitions tied with venerable Mr. Garcia (Miguel Sandoval), who has made a fabulous red.
Wine lovers won't just sip but guzzle a lot of this down, and the same effect that sun-dappled days and sex in California had on "Sideways" operates here. The eventual chain of events that actually gets the Montelena Chardonnay into Steven's competition is an underdog tale in extremis
, and Miller's tendency is to milk it, and milk some more.
A peculiar demand placed on the cast, from Farina in Paris to Pine, Rodriguez, Taylor and Pullman in Napa (and Rickman in both locales), is credibly reacting when tasting vintages, sending the visual clue that a great wine is at hand. Rickman plays the snob to human scale and never to exaggeration, while Miller lets Pine and Pullman go overboard with unevenly calibrated perfs. Taylor and Rodriguez, despite one ridiculous love scene, pull off big-screen charm.
Production is slick on a budget (though using Napa spots as a location substitute for France is an obvious flub), and plenty of visuals serve as little more than commercials for California wine country.
Camera (color, Panavision widescreen), Michael J. Ozier; editors, Miller, Dan O'Brien; music, Mark Adler; production designer, Craig Stearns; set decorator, Barbara Munch; costume designer, Jillian Kreiner; sound (Dolby Digital), Nelson Stoll; supervising sound editor, Kelly Oxford; sound re-recording mixers, Kevin Burns, Todd Orr; stunt coordinator, Rocky Cappella; associate producers, Bill Abraham, Randall Bingham, John Colton, Jack Miller, Phil Trubey; assistant director, Brian F. Relyea; casting, Rick Pagano. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (Spectrum), Jan. 18, 2008. MPAA Rating: PG-13. Running time: 112 MIN.
(English, French dialogue)
 



It's a great concept populated by great actors that works hard to make its audience feel great ! Only, sadly, Bottle Shock  is far from a great movie—a little too sweet to the taste, almost sickly so. Both ham-fisted and half-assed, this story of the early days of California winemaking (circa 1976, the year "California defeated all Gaul," as Time  put it back when West Coast vino trumped France's) is unsure whether it's a dark comedy, an oenological thriller, or an overwrought "true-life" underdog melodrama. So instead it's a little bit of all those things, and not much of anything once uncorked and left to sit. As vintner Jim Barrett , Bill Pullman  is either one hard-headed sumbitch or else just a crazy dude in serious need of institutionalization. (The movie makes it hard to tell.) Director and co-writer Randall Miller  should have kept the film small and low-key, like Alan Rickman , who delivers the sole great performance as Steven Spurrier , a snooty Paris wine-store owner that the actor manages to make rather affable. Spurrier heads to the States expecting to find American wines about as palatable as toilet water, but is quietly amazed by the quality of the product, letting on with only the slightest of bemused grins. The movie should have been more like Rickman: sparkling and light, with just a hint of acid. Instead, it's a huge gulp of vinegar.
