         "Boynton Beach Club" was directed by early '80s indie queen Susan Seidelman ("Smithereens," "Desperately Seeking Susan"), but it was inspired by her mother Florence's experiences after she moved to an "active adult" community in Florida. A light ensemble comedy about falling in love past retirement age, it follows the romantic adventures of a group of seniors who meet through a local bereavement support group.
 
  After Marilyn (Brenda Vaccaro) loses her husband to a crisply tanned elder driver who backs into him with her Mercury sedan, she reluctantly joins the Boynton Beach Bereavement Club at the suggestion of Lois (Dyan Cannon), a spunky, collagen-plumped widow in tight jeans and stilettos. Lois helps Marilyn adjust to life without her husband, learn how to drive again and manage her finances. In the meantime, she meets an attractive real estate developer (Michael Nouri) who seems almost too good to be true.
 


         






    Also new to the club is Jack (Len Cariou), who has recently lost his wife to cancer. Jack is immediately taken under the wing of resident lady-killer Harry (Joseph Bologna). He also attracts the attention of Sandy (Sally Kellerman), who gently tries to coax him into a relationship before he's ready to move on.
 
  Upbeat and occasionally self-consciously kooky, "Boynton Beach Club" doesn't exactly plumb the depths of the aging experience, but it has its moments of surprise and offers a look at life past the point where movies are generally interested. Harry's adventure in Internet dating is especially poignant, as are Jack's awkward attempts at courtship after years of routine early-bird special patronage with his wife. And Vaccaro is touching as a sheltered woman consumed with anger over her senseless and unexpected loss.
 
  As a niche entertainment catering to an overlooked audience, "Boynton Beach Club" is remarkable mostly for its optimism and solid performances. Seidelman, who directed the pilot episode of "Sex and the City," approaches her subject in a similarly schematic but likable way, giving a refreshingly contemporary spin to the lives of an underrepresented group.
 
 'Boynton Beach Club'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 A Roadside Attractions/Samuel Goldwyn Films release. Director Susan Seidelman. Screenplay by Susan Seidelman and Shelly Gitlow. Producers Florence Seidelman, Susan Seidelman. Director of photography Eric Moynier. Editor Keiko Deguchi. Music by Marcelo Garvos.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 44 minutes.
 
 In selected theaters.   

 The frisky 60-something residents of a Florida “active adult” community in “Boynton Beach Club” are so determined to find love that as you watch the movie, you might be excused for speculating that it is really a high school romantic comedy whose teenage characters are played by their grandparents.  Sally Kellerman, lean, blond, flashing her crocodile grin, and Dyan Cannon, maniacally perky and jiggling her curves, are definitely not the Golden Girls. Both actresses are 69, but you would never guess it while looking at these indefatigably youthful babes with weirdly unlined faces as they set their sights on eligible men and zoom in for the kill.  The movie, directed by Susan Seidelman, was inspired by the experiences of her mother, Florence (the movie’s producer), at an adult enclave in South Florida and is dedicated to exploring the proposition that 60 is the new 40. We’ve come a long way from the days of the old radio soap opera “The Romance of Helen Trent,” which was solemnly billed as the story of a woman who proved that “romance can live in life at 35 and even beyond.”  “Boynton Beach Club” revises that to 60 and counting. The single-minded avidity with which these women press their search for Mr. Right makes them seem more like 16.  “Boynton Beach Club” omits talk of surgery, blood pressure, cholesterol, arthritis and the thousand other health concerns of older people. One anxious widower resorts to Viagra to ease his transition back into the dating game, and that’s all we hear about medication, unless you count one widow’s stash of marijuana. Nobody frets about money or worries about how to stretch out a nest egg into old age.  The movie’s major acknowledgement of the passing of time is that most of these people have lost their mates and are going through the various stages of grief. The community’s social center is the Boynton Beach Bereavement Club, a support group for the recently bereft who are encouraged to air their feelings, meet new friends and get back into the swing of life. And by swing, I mean swing.  Once you’ve accepted that “Boynton Beach Club” is a rose-colored fantasy of aging, you can relax and enjoy the bittersweet comic performances by an ensemble that in addition to the aforementioned bombshells includes Joseph Bologna, Len Cariou, Michael Nouri, Renée Taylor and Brenda Vaccaro.  The most fragile among the major characters is Marilyn (Ms. Vaccaro), whose robustly healthy husband dies when he is hit by a car while literally dancing down the street. The driver, Anita (Ms. Taylor), is a fat, grotesquely tanned and bleached gorgon who hits him as she yaps on her cellphone while backing out of her driveway. She is the one character the movie refuses to forgive.  Marilyn is shepherded to the bereavement club by Lois (Ms. Cannon), an incessantly gabby, shamelessly flirtatious decorator who is the club’s unofficial social director. It is a sign of progress that Marilyn eventually screws up enough courage to confront the odious Anita and vent her anger.  Marilyn’s shy male counterpart Jack (Mr. Cariou), who lost his wife a few months earlier, is tutored in cooking and courtship by Harry (Mr. Bologna), a self-advertised ladies’ man whose vanity is momentarily punctured when a dream date he meets on the Internet turns out to be a prostitute. The movie’s most touching scenes observe Jack’s nervous re-entry into the dating world, where, under the patient ministrations of Sandy (Ms. Kellerman), he regains his sexual confidence.  Meanwhile Lois imagines she has found the answer to her prayers in Donald (Mr. Nouri), a beefy, somewhat younger guy who is not quite what he appears to be. As mature as these people are, they have no compunctions about misleading their potential partners to further their romantic agendas.  Lois is one of those age-defying hyperactive dynamos who trots around the streets of Boynton Beach with dumbbells. She is game for anything, be it running down the beach in high heels or learning inline skating.  A movie that sometimes feels like an aggressive infomercial for an antidepressant, “Boynton Beach Club” maintains the pace of a fast jog as Ms. Seidelman manipulates its formulaic machinery with a sure hand, resolving the characters’ romantic peccadilloes at a New Year’s sock hop. Smoothly balancing comedy and pathos, it infuses the fantasy with enough credibility to make you care about these people and wish them merrily on their way.

Susan Seidelman's sprightly, rueful comedy about death and survival in an "active adult" community in Florida cannily showcases the undimmed talents of seasoned divas Dyan Cannon, Sally Kellerman and Brenda Vaccaro, ably partnered by Joseph Bologna and Len Cariou. Briskly paced humor and/or pathos flow organically from situation and characters, with age providing less an occasion for one-liners than a now-or-never excuse to wallow in unfettered personality expression (not that Vaccaro, Kellerman or Cannon were ever shrinking violets). Unlikely to attract optimum demographics, "Boynton Beach Bereavement Club's" upbeat urbanity could still resonate with younger adults while veteran star power brings in the boomers. 
Script interweaves stories of the five leads around the titular support group, picking each character up at various stages of bereavement. 
Rawest loss belongs to Marilyn (Vaccaro). Viewers see a flashback of her irresistibly lively husband, mambo-ing down a suburban street, greeting everyone in sight, until a cell-phoning yenta (Renee Taylor) heedlessly backs out of her driveway and rolls over him. 
A grieving Marilyn is brought into the survivors' club by Lois (Cannon), and the two are soon best girlfriends. 
The second most recently bereaved, at three and a half months, is Jack (Cariou), who soon pairs up with self-styled "ladies' man" Harry (Joseph Bologna). If the opposite sex brings sparkle and spice back into living, same-sex buddies prove invaluable encyclopedias of basic survival skills in the clueless aftermath of co-dependency.
In addition to dealing with such mundane impossibilities as driving or cooking, the newly bereft are dragged kicking and screaming into pastel-hued romance by their erstwhile friends and supporters. Resuming dating at any age is daunting. Contemplating sleeping with a new partner in retirement homes strewn with memorabilia or stripped of specificity, after decades of comfortable cohabitation, looms difficult enough without the particular problems posed by post-prime sexuality. 
Thus Jack's flustered rejection of Sandy's (Kellerman's) dignified but overt sexual advances are hardly ego-shattering for the always upfront Sandy, her maturity also a blessing in dealing with panicky males. 
Lois finds neither age nor performance an issue in her rejuvenating affair with a younger Donald (Michael Nouri). Equal to the challenge of motorcycling, rollerblading or picnicking in high heels and high winds on a deserted beach in the harsh light of day, Lois is shocked to discover in herself an unexpected streak of snobbery when she finds out her suave Prince Charming has a less than classy job. 
And Harry's adventures in Internet dating deliver a great story along with a rude awakening when a too-good-to-be-true date turns out to come with a pricetag (the colorful rows of elaborate specialty vibrators in the bathroom closet should have been a dead giveaway). 
Remarkably free of condescension, cheapshot geriatric jokes, "special people" emotion-tugging, or falling-in-love musical montages, "Boynton Beach Bereavement Club" finds Seidelman in fine form, her career-long fascination with the interplay between "offbeat" and "normal" behavior breaking fertile new ground in the over-60s set while the sun-drenched aridity and acrylic-toned flatness of southern Florida adds new compositional color to her palette.
Real locations nicely serve the indie budget, the relative isolation of the retirement community easily alibiing pic's modest scale. Apt musical selections nostalgically wallpaper Kevin Kropp's understatedly kitschy set design.
