 “Boys Briefs 4” packages a half-dozen short yet interminable films about male prostitutes, with results of interest to precisely three demographics: programmers of gay film festivals, admirers of barely legal rough trade and connoisseurs of cliché. If you don’t belong to any of these categories but are dragged to the movie by someone who does, suggest staying home and renting “Boys Briefs 2” instead. You can tell them I said it’s the “Citizen Kane” of gay omnibus movies, and it will be much easier for you to pretend you are tired and leave.  We’re a long way from the hustler poetics of “My Own Private Idaho,” though we do pass through a hysterically stylized patch of rural New Zealand, courtesy of the director Welby Ings. His “Boy” turns Goth nonsense up to 11, burying a trite crime story under a mulch of 1990’s music video mannerisms. The Paris of “Gigolo,” directed by Bastian Schweitzer, is an improvement when its hilarious Euro-trash styling reminds us that the City of Light is also the city of petulant Algerian rent boys given to existential interior monologues.  In Armen Kazazian’s “Gold,” the client is a painter going blind. In the appropriately titled “Rock Bottom,” by Mary Feuer, he is a pathetic writer. Surprisingly, there is not one film about a mediocre filmmaker exploiting the talents of a needy youngster. Unfortunately, there are six.
Pity the poor horndog who sees the titillating title Boys Briefs 4  (and the ripped rent-boy on the poster) and expects some naughty fun, only to get this glum collection of festival-circuit flotsam. The six shorts in this mostly dire anthology, culled from as far afield as Germany and Australia, focus on male hustlers: The catch ranges from pretentious (Welby Ings 's Boy , an oppressively arty study of small-town rot) to pseudo-sophisticated (Bastian Schweitzer 's inadvertent Eurotrash parody Gigolo ), touching on familiar tropes of transaction, pay-to-play alienation, and the hardships of street life without transcending them. The standout is Mary Feuer 's Rock Bottom , in which a crack whore and his pudgy, lonesome trick descend a mutual spiral of self-negating need: With its grainy, garish night shooting and sexualized unease, it's as grimy as the titular pun. As a whole, though, the package is more cold fish than rough trade.
