Moviegoers in the '90s developed a special kinship with drag queens. In films like The Crying Game  and Paris Is Burning , the men who paraded themselves as women were garishly flamboyant and clever company, but they also became lightning rods of empathy, poignant in their pain. In their bitch-witted way, they stood in for the tough and saddened valor of anyone — everyone — who has felt, for even a moment, the cold-shoulder rejection of mainstream society.
Patrick ''Kitten'' Braden (Cillian Murphy), the young Irish beauty who's the hero/heroine of Breakfast on Pluto , is far from a full-time gender bender. Growing up in Ireland and England in the late '60s and early '70s, he makes few all-out attempts to hide, or fake, his sexual identity, sporting instead the look of a deliriously feminine glam-rock angel, with bushy brown Shirley Temple curls, froufy fake-fur tops, and big ripe sensual lips glossed in red. In spirit, though, he is very much a poor little drag queen — a wounded girl trapped in a boy's body, coltish and oh-so-innocent. Murphy, an ingratiating actor, speaks in the gentlest of sing-song caresses, the words flowing out like tears. All Patrick is looking for is a man to cherish and protect him, but the world — the cruel world! — won't cooperate.
In the course of the movie, Patrick forms tiny, flickering attachments to a great many men, from a macho Irish bar-band leader (Gavin Friday) to a posh psychopath played, with acid charisma, by Bryan Ferry to a doe-eyed magician (Stephen Rea) who makes him part of his act. But none of the liaisons last. There are many characters in Breakfast on Pluto , but there is really only Patrick, lost in his sweet perfume of isolation. He's a romantic victim, an androgynous waif out of time. He is also, I'm afraid, a bit of a bore.
Directed by Neil Jordan, who made that apotheosis of drag-queen-as-alien-who's-really-just-like-you movies, The Crying Game , Breakfast on Pluto  is a film that presumes we'll take one look at Patrick, with his elfin neediness and long-lashed bedroom eyes, and swoon on the spot with sympathetic understanding. In that presumption, however, Jordan lets slip virtually every rudiment of drama. He never deigns to develop his characters, he coats the movie in a wet blanket of whimsy, and he lets pop songs do his work for him more lavishly than Cameron Crowe did in Elizabethtown . Beneath the film's monotony, one senses a whiff of cop-out, of playing it safe: Patrick, for all his tender yearnings, shows no lust, no messy ego. He's a saddened saint in pouffy shirts, and Jordan turns his crying game into one big, long whine.

 The adage that history repeats itself first as tragedy, then as farce is charmingly illustrated by Neil Jordan's picaresque fairy tale, "Breakfast on Pluto." Superficially, the movie might be described as "The Crying Game" redux, in which the director revisits his 1992 political thriller with its gender-bending twist. This time, he reimagines its themes as a sprawling comic epic: "Candide" meets "Tom Jones" in drag heaven.  Once again, the Irish troubles rumble through the film, which is set mostly in the 1960's and 70's. But the violence is filtered through the hearts-and-flowers consciousness of a sweet, feminine boy, Patrick Braden (Cillian Murphy), a foundling who grows up to be a transvestite. Even when he is wrongly arrested and interrogated after a bombing in a London disco, his picture splashed across the front pages under the headline "Transvestite Terrorist," current events barely make a dent in his rose-colored vision of life.  "Breakfast on Pluto" is the second collaboration, following "The Butcher Boy," between Mr. Jordan and Patrick McCabe, who co-wrote this screen adaptation of his novel with the director. It has a similar zany, lurching momentum and vitality.  Throughout the film, Patrick, who prefers to be called Kitten, dismisses all politics as "serious, serious, serious." Or as an Oscar Wilde quotation used late in the movie puts it: "I love talking about nothing. It's the only thing I know anything about."  This is a movie in which the gossip exchanged by a pair of chirping robins is subtitled. Characters argue about the lyrics of the pop novelty "(How Much Is That) Doggie in the Window?" (Is the tail "waggedy" or "waggly"?) The name and image of Mitzi Gaynor loom large. The vintage pop that forms a running commentary on events leans toward sticky sentimentality and includes "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing" (sung by Jerry Vale), Morris Albert's "Feelings" and, most prominently, Bobby Goldsboro's treacly 1968 hit "Honey," which is Patrick's personal theme song.  This sweetness works in a delightfully subversive way. After a while "serious, serious, serious" becomes synonymous with silly, silly, silly. The violence and oppression through which Patrick passes, oblivious to danger and humiliation, seem like so much ridiculous macho bluster. But the movie's seductive frivolity also has a negative effect. Events, including the disco bombing, a cold-blooded execution and the tragic death of a childhood friend, meant to jolt us into reality, resonate less than they might. It's so much more pleasurable to huddle with Patrick inside his dream world.  With his wide blue eyes and curly hair, Mr. Murphy's Patrick (the actor was most recently seen as the villain in "Red Eye") is an androgynous beauty - poignant, trusting and gently flirtatious, but never predatory. In a year overcrowded with wonderful performances by lead actors, Mr. Murphy's immensely appealing turn ranks among the strongest.  Early in the film, we learn in a farcical fantasy sequence that Father Bernard (Liam Neeson), the parish priest in the Irish village where Patrick grows up, is his biological father. Nine months after the priest's frisky tussle with the housekeeper, a baby is deposited on the doorstep of the parish rectory. From the beginning, Patrick knows who he is and has no inclination to cover it up. The tough, crude pub owner in whose house he grows up, like the priests in his Catholic school, is scandalized by his refusal to act stereotypically male.  His three best childhood friends include a girl named Charlie and two boys, Irwin and Laurence, who has Down syndrome. Over the years their lives intersect.  Patrick begins his odyssey as a teenager when he is rescued from bullies by a gang of dope-smoking druid mystics who whisk him away to safety and tantalize him with a vision of astral highways leading to "breakfast on Pluto." His wanderlust sparked, Patrick tours with a glam-rock band in which he performs dressed as an Indian maiden  . To the consternation of the rest of the band, Billy (Gavin Friday), its lead singer, carries on a romance with Patrick, whom he installs in a run-down trailer in the countryside. Under its floorboards Patrick discovers a cache of I.R.A. weapons, which he blithely disposes of, with disastrous consequences.  Patrick eventually heads to London to search for his mother, whom he calls the Phantom Lady. He finds work dressing up as a Womble at a children's theme park and teams up with Bertie (Stephen Rea), a magician, who saws him in half and uses him in a hypnotism act. Although these episodes unfold as fanciful adventures in a storybook, they are fraught with peril.  Patrick's capacity for denial is stretched to the limit during his brutal interrogation after the bombing. Urged to make a statement, he spins out a fantasy of himself as a femme fatale, clad in shiny black leather, wielding a bottle of Chanel No. 5 as his weapon of choice in a game of espionage. Released after six days of questioning, he begs in vain to remain in the safety of his prison cell.  The mixture of merriment and grotesquerie goes on, reconnections to the past are made, violence flares and ebbs, and the story eventually trails off into a semi-happy ending. Patrick sails through it all, unbowed and unsullied, true to his friends but most of all to himself.  "Breakfast on Pluto" proposes a kind of radical disengagement from the mad, mad world: a fiercely willed, stubbornly held innocence that in the end stands as its own reward.  "Breakfast on Pluto" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has violence and some strong language.
Usually we can gather a consumer's shorthand of a filmmaker's worldview and worth after a dozen movies. Genius, artisan, lowbrow provocateur? Hack, freak, soulless buffoon? But consider if you can Neil Jordan , his career a treacherous, multiple-personality Wild West of thoughtful sublimities (The Company of Wolves , Mona Lisa , The Butcher Boy ), criminally inept catastrophes (High Spirits , We're No Angels , Michael Collins  ), and various in-betweens (Interview With the Vampire , In Dreams , The Good Thief ) whose disinterested lack of luster feels stranger than Jordan's worst crash-and-burns. What might be read, mildly, as a catholic range of interests seems in the watching more like a lack of interest altogether, or inexplicable obsessions that come and go like EKG spikes. Whatever: The new film Breakfast on Pluto  may be Jordan's wildest mis-shot yet, so dense with dying fizzle and limp ideas that I began to wonder if Jordan has an evil twin, or if there are in fact several Neil Jordans , among them at least one literate stylist and one humor-handicapped village idiot.
I haven't read the Patrick McCabe  novel, and am not likely to now; the unbraked blarney on tap in Jordan's translation tends to curdle in the belly. It's a coy picaresque, traveling the life path of one Patrick Braden  (Cillian Murphy ), an abandoned Irish baby who grows into a hyperbolically fey cross-dresser, renaming himself "Kitten," pissing off the teachers at school, outraging the neighborhood, and as an adult, bouncing from one larky, '60s—'70s incident (and song interlude) to the next. Kitten's odyssey more or less begins with digitally animated songbirds flittering around the fictional north-south partition town, their chirps subtitled as snarky dialogue. As if that weren't souring enough, Kitten turns out to be a living cliché, a starry-eyed "gamine" in search of his errant mother (who, naturally, resembles a revered camp icon, namely Mitzi Gaynor ). Often enough, Kitten crosses paths with the Troubles, falling for a gun-smuggling glam rocker and watching in gape-mouthed slo-mo as a retarded childhood friend gets blown up by a street bomb.
Although Kitten eventually enjoys employment in London's sex industry, Breakfast on Pluto  is conspicuously shy about nookie and damn near witless in its efforts to visualize Kitten's hyperactive fantasy life. (A superspy daydream, in which Murphy's ordeal-by-dimples vamp annihilates an army of bad guys with spritzes of Chanel , is lead footed, if self-consciously so.) Jordan is clearly taken with drag queens, but he displays a longshoreman's fluency with camp culture (which has, I dare say, few depths to plumb in any case). Insofar as it matters, Murphy is more gorgeous than, though just as unconvincing as, The Crying Game 's Jaye Davidson . Armed with pursed über-lips and an affected, girly head voice that chirrups so faintly a fifth of his lines are inaudible, Murphy is no threat to John Cameron Mitchell . The stranglehold cuteness of the character kept suggesting to me Barney the dinosaur 's friend Baby Bop; "Oh kind sir!" is a typical Kitten exclamation. (McCabe, author of the comparatively tough and scalding The Butcher Boy , might be another king of infuriating inconstancy.) Bringing up the rear, Brendan Gleeson  and Ian Hart  leave refreshing paw prints with bellicose supporting bits. After over two hours, the animated debating songbirds return, as if to punish us for remaining when we might've bailed.
