
Friends become enemies in a chick flick with a mean streak
Ah, January - that chilly, unforgiving season when the major studios flush their pipes and unleash their failed projects - the lame, halt, and blind of movies - upon an enervated public.
First out of the sluiceway is "Bride Wars." It's a chick flick; nothing wrong with that. But it's also a chick flick that makes its chick characters - and by extension its chick audience - look like hateful, backward toddlers, and there is something wrong with that.
Anne Hathaway and Kate Hudson play Emma and Liv, Manhattan career girls and BFFs who've shared an obsession with the perfect wedding ever since their moms took them to lunch at the Plaza's Palm Court when they were little. (Curiously, aside from Central Park and a few other exteriors, most of the film was shot in Boston, which will cause cognitive dissonance among local moviegoers, patrons of Les Zygomates, Red Sox players whose wives turn up as extras, and absolutely no one else. It's official, then: We're Toronto.)
Liv's the Veronica in this twosome - a fire-breathing corporate lawyer used to getting her own way - and Emma, a demure public school teacher, is the Betty. Even that's overselling the thing: "Bride Wars" is so numbingly giddy it makes "Archie" look like Sartre. The two get engaged to their respective boyfriends (played by Steve Howey and Chris Pratt, neither of them well-known or charismatic enough to upstage the stars), and end up having their weddings scheduled for the same date, time, and place. Let the sabotage begin.
The midsection of "Bride Wars," as Emma discovers her inner meanie and Liv enlists her personal assistant (Michael Arden) in the campaign, has a few spiteful laughs. Liv sends Emma daily chocolates so she'll bust out of her Vera Wang; Emma spikes the tanning salon formula so Liv looks like a Cheeto; Liv crashes Emma's bachelorette party at a male stripper club. And so on.
First of all, though, what New York power lawyer is going to have her bachelorette party at a male strip club? Second of all, do little girls - actual human ones, that is - still dream their weddings down to the last detail except for the guy? Did they ever? I know, it's a movie, but a movie has to have one foot in believability, or, heaven forbid, characters who aren't self-absorbed dolts.
So you take the crumbs: Kristen Johnston hamming it up as Emma's boozy co-worker and last-minute maid of honor; Candice Bergen stooping to her role as the city's top wedding planner with a frozen smile. Among its other sillinesses, "Bride Wars" has a fear of larger-than-average rumps that extends to the dialogue and an inability to photograph Bergen below the waist. (At one point she's posed behind a chair so as not to scare the children.) This may be the first chick flick that's actively bulimic.
Director Gary Winick hits all the farcical beats, but the script's too clueless and mean-spirited - about marriage, about men, about female friendship - to take off. Even given a dopey last-minute plot twist, Hathaway survives on her Keane-eyed poise. Hudson, though, can't make Liv likable or even interesting. Even her bangs are shrewish.
Worse, there's no natural chemistry between her and Hathaway. How are these two even friends? When all is said and done, "Bride Wars" is structured as a romance between two straight girlfriends - that's why all the men look like interchangeable underwear models - but there's no emotional connection to tie it together. It's a love story about two women who only love themselves.


As best friends who become dueling bridezillas, Kate Hudson and Anne Hathaway are the right stars for the era of megagirly princess feminism. In Bride Wars , it's funny, and telling, that when they land a meeting with New York's most fabled wedding planner (Candice Bergen), they're already so steeped in the minutiae of matrimony that it's clear they could do the job just as well themselves. Both women have spent their lives dreaming of a June wedding at the Plaza (you wonder how recently they've checked their daddies' stock portfolios), but due to a logistical screwup, they end up booking their nuptials there on the exact same day.
It's not clear why this is such  a big problem, but it is. Neither one will budge, which leads to an escalating battle of the sorority-bitch gambits: One dyes the   other's hair blue, revenge is served up at a tanning   salon, and so on. Directed by the usually more supple Gary Winick (13 Going on 30 ), Bride Wars  isn't really a romantic comedy, since the two grooms-to-be have about as much presence as waiters. The comedy is all about these bazooka-brained brides and their holy right to treat a wedding as more important than, you know, marriage. Hudson, her sunny good cheer baked to a dominatrix flatness, and Hathaway, her long-limbed smiling charm all a-gangle, go at their frilly   obsessions like joyless rival executives. Bride Wars  pretends to be a satire of wedding mania, but since there's virtually nothing else to the movie, the satire comes depressingly close to endorsement. 

 Do Hollywood studio executives think that women have a gene for tulle? Neural receptors just for Vera Wang? I wondered this as I was watching “Bride Wars,” a dopey if largely painless romantic comedy with Kate Hudson and Anne Hathaway as best friends forever who turn into best enemies forever because of a wedding day glitch. Since childhood, the two have dreamed of getting married at the Plaza (alas, not to each other), a reverie that turns into a manufactured nightmare when their respective nuptials are scheduled for the same day in June.  A reasonable person might suggest a double wedding, as one of the male characters does. As far as I can tell, however, both Liv (Ms. Hudson) and Emma (Ms. Hathaway) are deeply unreasonable because they are female stereotypes: unreasonableness is built into their character arcs. After the scheduling botch and after dismissing the idea of a double wedding, they go to war. Petty and cutesy pathological behavior ensues: Liv replaces Emma’s spray-on-tan formula with an angry orange that brings to mind deep-fried Donatella Versace. Emma tampers with Liv’s hair dye, recoloring her honeyed locks a streaky blue and white that simultaneously invokes fairground cotton candy, leaky Bic pens and Courtney Love.  But before these BFF’s turn into BEFs, they shop. They shop for stationery, they shop for cakes, flowers, rings and of course satiny swaths of designer white that will, if only for a single dreamy day, transform these putatively sharp, savvy, seemingly capable modern women into fairy tale princesses. The overworked schoolteacher, Emma, and the high-flying, hardball lawyer, Liv, will slough off their everyday cares, clothes and carnal histories (both live with their dreary boyfriends) and assume the mantle of symbolic purity. Re-virginized, in a manner of speaking, they will become the center of attention not only in their lives but also in the movies, which these days have an otherwise difficult time making this much room for women.  Hence the wedding, which lately seems to offer one of the few story lines that afford American actresses shots at serious screen time. I’m exaggerating, of course, though to judge from a clutch of recent titles — “License to Wed,” “Margot at the Wedding,” “Evening,” “Enchanted,” “The Heartbreak Kid,” “Sex and the City,” “Mamma Mia!,” “27 Dresses” and “Made of Honor” — the walk down the aisle has picked up increasing speed. Weddings are big business, and now  so too are movies involving comically tragic, tragically comic ceremonies that range from the low-end vulgar (“What Happens in Vegas”) to the high-end touchy-feely (“Rachel Getting Married”) and generally have less to do with the world we live in than Adam Sandler’s cheeky (straight) buddy comedy, “I Now Pronounce You Chuck & Larry.”  But reality doesn’t seem the point of most wedding movies, which may explain their appeal, at least to risk-averse studios. Though it has a patina of realism, “Bride Wars” often seems as much a fairy tale as “Enchanted,” the 2007 Disney movie with Amy Adams in which a would-be cartoon bride evolves into a live-action careerist.  Directed by Gary Winick,  “Bride Wars” takes place in a shiny New York fantasia where a teacher like Emma could, after a decade of penny pinching and Chinese takeout, afford the services of an exclusive wedding planner (a humorous, stiff-lipped Candice Bergen) and a Plaza blowout. Emma even eyeballs a Vera Wang (on her Web site the designer returns the favor with a sizable ad for the movie).  It’s only fitting, then, that Mr. Winick, a Sundance alumnus turned Hollywood hire, has made New York look as pretty as a tourist postcard. That’s par for the mainstream course, but it’s too bad that he doesn’t (or can’t) venture down the more interesting avenues opened up in the screenplay, which is credited to Greg DePaul (who came up with the story) and the writing team of Casey Wilson and June Diane Raphael,  who both have small parts in the movie. The opener — a gauzy scene from childhood that finds Liv and Emma, dressed as a bride and groom, tenderly dancing with each other — and an adult catfight, which looks like a prelude to a kiss, suggest that there may be more to this friendship (and the fury underlying its rupture) than either the women or the movie can admit.  But then this is a Kate Hudson flick, after all (she was also one of the producers), and often as inconsequential as almost every other Kate Hudson movie of the last decade. Happily it’s also something of an Anne Hathaway movie, which means that there’s a little acting in it, along with a few human emotions and two wide-pooling eyes that invite you to get lost in them.  You don’t — there’s no getting lost in a movie like “Bride Wars” — but it’s nice to pretend that they might lead somewhere else, say to San Francisco, where once upon another time two female movie characters, inspired by Harvey Milk (or maybe just Sean Penn), will take on the gay-marriage ban and say “I do, I do” to something more than shopping.  Die, Bridezilla, die!  “Bride Wars” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Dangerous acts of consumerism.

Even the climactic catfight in chiffon doesn't pay off in "Bride Wars," a shrill, mechanical comedy dedicated to the proposition that a wedding that doesn't take place at the Plaza Hotel is scarcely worth having at all. As top-billed Kate Hudson takes a producer credit here, she can no longer blame anyone else for poor scripts she accepts with uncanny consistency -- 10 in a row at this point -- whereas co-star Anne Hathaway can chalk it up to a well-accoutered payday. Males will be as scarce as hens' teeth at theaters showing Fox's first 2009 release, but the prospect of watching the two stars shop, plan and then try to undermine each other's weddings guarantees a fair portion of the "Sex and the City" audience will consider this a good excuse for a girls'night out.
Script by Greg DePaul and the "Rode Hard and Put Away Wet" and "Saturday Night Live" writing-performing team of Casey Wilson and June Diane Raphael pivots on the notion that two lifelong best friends would become mortal enemies because of a wedding scheduling conflict at the hotel where they've both always dreamed of getting married. It's not a pretty picture of enlightened contempo femaleness, but no less believable than anything else in the film -- including, in a bit of wishful thinking product placement, the sights of upscale New Yorkers drinking nothing but Budweiser and of a schoolteacher signing on for a deluxe wedding without even inquiring as to the cost.
But then, the movie is already a period piece, made before last September, when price wasn't an issue. And it certainly isn't here when it comes to a wedding, an event that arrives at the same time for Liv (Hudson), a steamrolling attorney, and Emma (Hathaway), a demure teacher. However, an uncommon error by their wedding planner (Candice Bergen, neatly injecting a slightly daft note into her imperious character) puts them at odds for what is evidently the single available date at the Plaza for years to come, and Emma decides that, for once, she's not going to let Liv have her way without a battle.
From the opening bell, director Gary Winick displays exceptional lack of finesse by cutting on cue to whoever is speaking a line; he won't even hold a two-shot to let some interplay develop. When the girls aren't reacting to whatever's going on by saying "Oh, my God!" for the 47th time, space is made for little pop-tune bridges that lead to the film's few passably amusing scenes, all devoted to mutual sabotage -- Emma tries to fatten Liv up by anonymously sending her candies, Liv subverts Emma by injecting orange spray into the latter's tanning session, Emma crashes Liv's bachelorette disco/stripper party and gets crowned sexiest bride, et al. -- building up to D-Day, June 6, when both weddings are scheduled to take place.
Gilded with innocuous life lessons and no end of couture window dressing, pic will go down easily enough with viewers who know and want what they're getting into, but is a time-killer for anyone else. Not pushed to hit any notes that aren't in the script, the capable stars are on autopilot, while stereotypes are overindulged by Kristen Johnston as Emma's craven, slovenly fellow teacher and Michael Arden as Liv's gay associate and stand-in "maid of honor." Tech contributions are passable.
