 Nicolas Winding Refn’s “Bronson” is a highly stylized and embellished film biography of a man known as the most famous prisoner in Britain. Born Michael Peterson in 1952 and raised mostly in the city of Luton, Charles Bronson, renamed after the American movie star, has spent all but a few months of the last 35 years in prison, mostly in solitary confinement.  The film, dominated by the bald, snarling and oddly charming presence of Tom Hardy in the title role, is not interested in sociological or psychological explanations. Bronson’s parents are quiet, respectable lower-middle-class types, fond of their son even as he finds himself in all kinds of trouble, and he seems to suffer neither deprivation nor childhood trauma. The propensity to do violence seems wired into him, less a pathology than a kind of talent. He does some stealing, but his real vocation, his art, is fighting.  At one point a warden seeks to understand this incorrigible inmate’s propensity for “nihilistic and godless behavior” and asks Bronson, who has developed a habit of taking hostages in his cell, what he wants from the authorities. The answer is an Anglo-Saxon imperative that pretty much sums up Bronson’s worldview.  And it is an attitude Mr. Refn, whose previous films include the vivid and vicious “Pusher” trilogy, presents with unnerving relish and flair. Sometimes Bronson speaks directly to the camera in front of a black background. At other times he appears in black tie and music-hall makeup in front of a theater full of appreciative patrons. His monologues are punctuated by exquisitely choreographed and art-directed scenes of brutality, shot from low angles and accompanied by soaring arias or throbbing techno beats.  The effect is a bit like Stanley Kubrick’s “Clockwork Orange” reimagined as a one-man stage show and stripped of any political implications. Bronson’s crimes become a kind of performance art, and the film becomes, bizarrely enough, the portrait of a genius misunderstood and marginalized by a bureaucratic and hypocritical social order.  “Bronson” invites you to admire its protagonist as a pure, muscular embodiment of anarchy. And perhaps you will, but you may also be glad that he’s still behind bars.  “Bronson” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes extreme violence and abundant profanity.

Gleeful brutality and intellectual mischief have become the bloodstained calling cards of Danish auteur Nicolas Winding Refn, whose "Pusher" trilogy cultivated a fanboy base that will follow him blindly into "Bronson" -- a huge leap for the director -- and a disturbing, innovative bio-pic about England's most notorious prison inmate. Too smart/arty for the slasher set, and too violent for high-brows, "Bronson" may have a tough time finding its niche, although it has "cult hit" written all over it.
Charles Bronson, born Michael Petersen, is a singular phenomenon: As a young man he was arrested for armed robbery, and his 7-year sentence has grown into 34 years in prison, 30 in solitary confinement -- all due to his seemingly joyous commitment to bringing mayhem to the correctional system. A worldwide petition is in circulation to free Bronson (he was renamed by his boxing manager), based on the fact that he has spent so long behind bars without ever having killed, raped or molested anyone. Whether anyone will want to see him freed after "Bronson" is another story.
Portrayed by a transcendent Tom Hardy, who apparently gained 100 pounds of muscle to play the part, Refn's Bronson is both dangerous and puckish. He addresses the camera directly, shot from slightly below with an austere dignity, or onstage at an English music hall, where he occasionally wears clown paint while telling his audience a tale of rage and resolve. Refn, as expected, mines as much drollery out of Bronson and his situation as possible without ever relieving the tension that this human explosive device generates.
"My parents were decent upstanding members of society," he tells us; not so young Michael, who is stealing and fighting before he can shave. Michael wants to be the best at something -- to be admired. He may be a casualty of the celebrity age, or he may just be creative. "Prison was finally the place where I could sharpen my tools," he says. And perfect his art, which is the art of war.
"Bronson" is beautiful -- d.p. Larry Smith does stellar work -- and Hardy's performance is outstanding, especially considering he's playing multiple parts: There's the war-painted, hell-raising Bronson who dives lustily into herds of prison "screws" and nearly beats them down. There's the briefly out-of-prison Bronson who, deprived of his natural habitat, becomes meek, vulnerable and, for a moment, the awkward lover to the faithless Allison (Juliet Oldfield). It's not just that he can't function. He's almost invisible.
When Bronson reunites with his Uncle Jack (Hugh Ross), who runs a brothel/salon for cross-dressers, the film starts to flag, because you realize at that point there's been no story: It's all been set-up, atmosphere and character building, without any narrative momentum.
But Refn gets back on the bike and starts telling what he means to tell about Bronson, and his art. The director doesn't explain Bronson so much as use him as a mirror for viewers who would probably like to act out against the frustrations of life by putting someone's head through a wall. Bronson is therapeutic and strangely calming, probably because his brand of nonstop fury seems absolutely exhausting.
For all the prankishness of "Bronson," and its bloody violence, Refn and co-writer Brock Norman Brock have an agenda. If Bronson is insane, then why does he enrage people so? And what does society do with someone whose art is violence?
In the film's best extended scene, a prison art teacher, Phil (James Lance) manages to get inside Bronson, whom he believes has an artistic gift. Bronson lets down his guard momentarily, offering a painting to the prison governor (Jonny Phillips) and is rebuffed. So he takes Phil hostage, paints himself in grease and charcoal and goes back to battling the screws.
Production values are excellent, notably the sound design of Christian Conrad and the work of his colleagues Tim Barker and Dominik Schleier.

The anti-globalist performance guys who call themselves the Yes Men are masters of forging corporate rhetoric and media protocols. The most recent prank perpetrated by Andy Bichlbaum  and Mike Bonanno  (not their real names) involved an eco-warning simulacrum of the New York Post   (headline: "WE'RE SCREWED"), pegged to last month's U.N.  summits; their forte, however, is the phony website and the fraudulent PowerPoint  presentation.
A sequel to their first film, The Yes Men  (2004), The Yes Men Fix the World  continues the saga with the heroes' greatest stunt—one going live on BBC World  in the guise of a Dow Chemical  spokesman with the Pynchonian handle of "Jude Finisterra" to announce that Dow would mark the 20th anniversary of the Bhopal  chemical disaster with a $12 billion aid plan for the victims. Stock dropped faster than the interviewer's jaw.
The BBC, which had taken the bait of a faux-website, blamed the Yes Men for fooling the poor people of Bhopal into thinking they would get justice. But Fix the World  asks that the spectator decide which hoax was crueler—the Yes Men's, which at least directed attention back to Bhopal, or Dow's. As hinted by their affirmative name, the Yes Men enact scenarios, however fleeting, of social justice. In a similar stunt, the duo impersonate a HUD  representative and his flack, dropping in on a New Orleans event attended by the ever-jive Mayor Nagin , with the surprise news that HUD is reopening the Ninth Ward public housing projects shut down (and later destroyed) in Katrina 's wake.
These political tricksters have an additional agenda: identifying the late market über alles  economist Milton Friedman  as the enemy. (Their deadpan interviews with Friedman's true believers are the most effectively informative aspect of the movie.) But mainly, Fix the World  is about the beauty of the riff. The Yes Men are funniest when addressing a straight audience, making outlandish claims in favor of the free market and the benefits of unregulated catastrophe—the Black Plague gave us capitalism! What's fascinating is spectator reaction (or lack of same). Some people laugh or register disgust; others find their ideas "refreshing."Although the Yes Men's presentation on Exxon 's plan to recycle unproductive corpses as a fuel called Vivoleum—which included passing out (smelly) candles as a sample—largely bombs, an equally ludicrous demonstration of an inflatable, extremely expensive survival suit is hailed as "very cool." As one Yes Man explains, "Instead of freaking out, they just took our business cards." People want to believe.
The Yes Men Fix the World  ends on a utopian note with last November's distribution of a fake, post-dated New York Times   (among the thrilling headlines, "IRAQ WAR ENDS" and "Nation Sets Its Sights on Building Sane Economy"). Random New Yorkers are amazed to find good news—strategically timed to celebrate the equally impossible election of Barack Obama . The Yes Men have pulled off another coup, although my own pleasure, watching Fix the World , was mitigated by the brief appearance in the film of one of ACORN 's founders—an unintentional reminder that left-wing tactics, whether community organizing or guerrilla theater, can be appropriated by the right.
Writing on the ACORN gotcha tapes in last week's Nation , Chris Hayes  referred to the Borat Effect—"human beings' intense socialization to be helpful and not rock the boat, even when confronted with someone doing something objectionable, outrageous, or preposterous." Although the Yes Men also draw on this syndrome, they almost never draw blood. They're good guys who operate in the realm of materialized fantasy. Typically targeting some corporate Goliath, their performance pieces offer a taste of what utopia might feel like if authority told the truth. In this, Bichlbaum and Bonanno are essentially entertainers who strut and fret their hour on the media stage, delighting sympathetic audiences with the possibility of change.
The Yes Men's virtuoso naturalism is essentially an exercise in pleasurable illusion. The real realists are the college clowns who pranked ACORN—the rich and privileged laughing at the poor and disenfranchised. What's more, as made for YouTube, amplified by the Fox News  megaphone, and set to the news cycle drumbeat, their crude stunt had actual repercussions.
The eponymous protagonist  of the British film Bronson  is another sort of hoax-perpetrating performance artist—but, upending a script he was handed, director Nicolas Winding Refn punches across his real-life story with such demented gusto that it's difficult to ascertain the precise nature of Bronson's act.
The inmate who renamed himself after a Hollywood  action star has been incarcerated for all but a few months of the past 34 years—30 of them spent in solitary—having strategically attacked a succession of guards, attendants, and fellow inmates to parlay his initial seven-year sentence for armed robbery into a lifelong role as "Britain's most violent prisoner." The first thing Bronson tells us, in direct address, is that "all my life, I wanted to be famous." Cut to the mad dog wannabe (played with insane brio by Tom Hardy ) in his cell battling half a dozen screws.
With his shaved head, handlebar mustache, and mighty physique frequently stripped down for action, Hardy's Bronson resembles a sideshow strongman—he also serves as the ringmaster and chief clown in the brawling three-ring circus that is Refn's movie. Despite the naturalistic mayhem Refn deployed in his widely praised Pusher  trilogy (violent, drug-dealer demimonde in darkest Denmark ) and for all the bellowing fisticuffs here, Bronson  is essentially a faux-operatic, music hall turn—a larky, lumpen version of Lola Montès  . Bronson goes from prison to mental hospital to a few weeks of freedom, until another botched robbery lands him back in the slammer. There, he abruptly reveals a talent for drawing goofy cartoons. (The real Bronson makes art, writes poetry, and has published 11 books.) But pugnacity remains the source of his celebrity. He repeatedly traps unwary guards so as to ensure that he'll get the shit kicked out of him once more.
