 "Brooklyn Lobster," Kevin Jordan's small family drama, set in Sheepshead Bay, is an unusually pure example of American kitchen-sink realism. With an astutely chosen ensemble led by Danny Aiello and Jane Curtin, it has integrity up to its eyeballs. But integrity and accuracy of detail are not synonymous with clarity or dramatic weight. Mr. Jordan, who wrote, directed and produced this semiautobiographical film, is so close to his material that he often gets lost in it.  As it explores the problems besetting Frank Giorgio (Mr. Aiello), a gruff, stubborn bull of a man who runs a small lobster pound founded by his father in 1938, the movie sometimes plays like a tedious case history adapted from a business-school textbook. Too often, family relationships take a back seat to financial entanglements.  Frank faces putting his beloved shop up for auction because the loan he took out to add a restaurant to his operation has been called. He has adhered to a court order to advertise the future sale, but he has bent the rules by placing inconspicuous announcements in out-of-the-way places. His defensive strategy does not go unnoticed, and when confronted in court, he responds with hostility.  Frank also has domestic problems. Maureen (Ms. Curtin), his tart-tongued, eagle-eyed wife of three decades, has walked out on him, citing poor communication. As she puts it, "There's not much to say about crustaceans."  In the two weeks spanned by the movie, the Giorgio clan has gathered for the Christmas holidays. Frank's son, Michael (Daniel Sauli), who has inherited his father's hotheaded temperament, has returned from Seattle (where he is struggling for a foothold in the dot-com world), accompanied by his girlfriend, Kerry (Heather Burns), whom he wants to marry. While he shares the same pull-out couch with his father, Kerry stays in a seedy Russian motel near Brighton Beach. Maureen, meanwhile, imposes on her daughter, Lauren (Marisa Ryan), and son-in-law, Justin (Ian Kahn), who have a new baby.  "Brooklyn Lobster" is an elegy for a kind of working-class self-determination that the movie portrays as threatened by big business. A proposal that Frank sell out to a fast-food franchise is made and rejected out of hand. The movie is also a muted celebration of family ties. The Giorgios' relationships may be strained at the seams, but the closely knit clan is not about to come apart.

Despite worthy contributions on both sides of the camera, "Brooklyn Lobster" comes across primarily as a showcase for Danny Aiello in a powerhouse performance as a Sheepshead Bay lobster wholesaler facing the loss of his long-suffering wife, his failing family business and his tradition-bound way of life. Character's multiple mid-life crises could make this genuinely engaging drama especially appealing to older viewers, provided second feature by writer-director Kevin Jordan ("Goat on Fire and Smiling Fish") can target auds beyond the traditional alt-cinema circuit. If indie distrib Meadowbrook Pictures wants to net mainstream ticketbuyers before homevid release, savvy marketing is a must.
To his considerable credit, Aiello isn't afraid to be less than sympathetic, or worse, during key moments as Frank Girorgio, a bearish family patriarch who refuses to seek help from anyone, even family members. Years earlier, a local bank loaned Frank a hefty sum so he could add a restaurant to the lobster shop his family has operated for generations. But the bank has folded, and Frank now faces a public auction of his chronically cash-strapped business.
Prodigal son Michael (Daniel Sauli) reluctantly returns home to lend a hand. But Frank bristles when Michael tries to attract financial investment from the family of his beautiful fiancee (Heather Burns). 
When Frank surmises that the fiancee's wheeler-dealer uncle (Tom Mason) is behind a pre-emptive bid for his business, he angrily confronts the uncle in pic's best scene, a suspenseful verbal clash that seems only a heartbeat away from physical violence.
Jane Curtin works hard to sustain a balance between wisecracking humor and resigned melancholy as Maureen, Frank's wife, who's finally ready to leave the moody husband from whom she's felt estranged for years. Sauli is winning as well-meaning Michael, while Marisa Ryan (as Frank's supportive daughter) and Ian Kahn (as her ambitious husband) are stand-outs in less prominent roles.
Ultimately, however, Aiello dominates with equal measures of gruff bluster, pained confusion and not-so-quiet desperation. It's an impressively multifaceted performance that could generate quite a few shocks of recognition among pic's most likely aud. 
Tech values are serviceable at best, but rough edges don't diminish pic's credibility. Jordan reportedly drew story from first-hand observations -- his family operated a lobster shop in Sheepshead Bay for many years -- which may explain why much of "Brooklyn Lobster" abounds in precise details rendered with documentary-style realism. Verisimilitude obviously impressed Martin Scorsese, who is allowing producers to use phrase "Martin Scorsese presents" in opening credits and promotional material.

Despite that curious "Martin Scorsese  presents" credit, Brooklyn  Lobster  is almost entirely home cooked: a movie inspired by the story of a family lobster farm, directed and produced by two of the farm's heirs (Kevin Jordan , of Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire , and his brother Darren). Perhaps, like the characters in the film, everyone involved feared going franchise would spoil the broth. But outside of the Jordan inner circle, this family-versus-business parable comes across as slight, familiar, and in dire need of seasoning. Danny Aiello  plays irritable Frank Giorgio , the longtime owner of a Sheepshead Bay  lobster farm that faces foreclosure thanks to a defaulted bank loan. Not particularly sympathetic, Frank talks down to the hearing judge and shouts at anyone with the impertinence to consider buying his company. Frank's dotcom-chasing son (Daniel Sauli ) is on hand to declare his father's behavior impractical; he also plans to propose to his girlfriend (Heather Burns ), a plot development with the dramatic interest of a pile of dead seaweed. Frank's estranged wife (Jane Curtin ) claims to have moved out because "there's not much to say about crustaceans." The same could be said of Brooklyn Lobster .
