 Anyone who innocently stumbles into “Brothers of the Head” and comes away thinking that it presents a bizarre true footnote in the history of rock can be excused for being taken in. This is a fake documentary that barely lets on that it’s fiction.  The term mockumentary, invented to describe films like “This Is Spinal Tap” that signal their satiric intentions with sly winks and gentle nudges, doesn’t really apply to “Brothers,” which lurches toward pathos and tragedy rather than humor. Pretending to look back 30 years, it also evokes the mid-1970’s British rock scene with a wild, thrashing immediacy.  “Brothers of the Head” relates the biography of conjoined twins from the southeast coast of England, named Tom and Barry Howe, who at the age of 18 are sold by their father to a sleazy British impresario. The story is an uncomfortable reminder of the degree to which rock ’n’ roll, for all its vaunted “authenticity,” has always been a traveling circus. From Elvis to Michael Jackson, from Kiss to Marilyn Manson, the lines between pop artist and sideshow freak have always been blurry.  After purchasing the twins, their diabolical owner, Zak Bedderwick (Howard Attfield), a former vaudeville child star, whisks them to his secluded country mansion, Humbleden Hall. There they are ruthlessly groomed by an abusive manager, Nick Sidney (Sean Harris), into a proto-punk rock band called the Bang Bang, and their development is chronicled by Eddie Pasquar (Tom Bower), an American cinéma vérité filmmaker and protégé of D. A. Pennebaker.  The Bang Bang’s sensational first public performance in 1975 takes place in the back room of a seedy pub where the furious response to a hostile audience creates pandemonium. The movie follows the twins over the next several months to their final performance, at which — in an inspired touch of imaginary rock mythmaking — a violent incident not recorded by the camera ends their career on a note of mystery.  The duo’s pre-punk pop, composed by Clive Langer, a guitarist in the real-life mid-70’s band Deaf School and later a successful new-wave producer, is a stylistically dead-on period re-creation. “Two-Way Romeo,” the title of their clattering signature song, is also the name of an unfinished film about the twins of which we see snippets, supposedly directed by Ken Russell, who plays himself.  Attached at the lower chest by a thick band of elastic-looking flesh that they flash at audiences with gleeful malevolence, the Howe brothers are brilliantly portrayed by the real-life identical (but not conjoined) twin brothers Harry and Luke Treadaway, who play their own instruments. Glowering at the camera with wet-lipped insolence, these skinny young actors with their insinuating stares exude an eerie children-of-the-damned intensity accentuated by the movie’s phantasmagoric look.  The film, adapted from a 1977 novel by Brian Aldiss, gives each twin a distinct personality. Tom (Harry Treadaway), the more physically robust of the two, is also the gentler one; Barry (Luke Treadaway), who has a congenital heart problem, is a lighted stick of dynamite. The actors evoke the suffocating carnal knowledge these two separate beings are forced to share, and that they publicly flaunt in an early performance in which they suddenly turn their heads and kiss on the mouth.  Those who enter the twins’ orbit immediately acquire a taint of prurience. Before their pub debut, Laura Ashworth (Tania Emery), a journalist who has gotten wind of their existence, is allowed into the inner circle on the pretext of writing about the exploitation of the disabled. When she falls in love with Tom, Barry, forced to be both observer and captive participant in the romance (no sex is shown), becomes bitterly jealous. As both twins embrace the usual rock ’n’ roll excesses of drugs and booze, Barry shaves his hair into a Mohawk.  “Brothers of the Head” was directed by Louis Pepe and Keith Fulton, whose earlier films include two documentaries about the filmmaker Terry Gilliam, “The Hamster Factor and Other Tales of 12 Monkeys” (1997) and “Lost in La Mancha” (2002). The new movie, although fictional, feels as real as their earlier films.  In a haunting recurrent image, the ever-present camera trails the twins into a bathroom and pauses at the door as they turn around and flash an accusing look. Is there no privacy? That hostile glare implicates us as well.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

"This Is Spinal Tap" meets "Stuck on You," with a heavy dose of '70s Brit-rock grunge, in loopy mockumentary "Brothers of the Head." Feature debut by Yank duo Keith Fulton and Louis Pepe isn't so far from their engrossing docus on Terry Gilliam's filmic adventures, "The Hamster Factor" (1996) and "Lost in La Mancha" (2001), except here the madness and exploitation is part of the music scene. Not for the PC crowd, pic, about a pair of conjoined Siamese twins who enjoy 15 minutes of fame prior to total madness, has modest legs as a cult item beyond festival gigs.
Screenplay by occasional Gilliam collaborator Tony Grisoni, based on the 1977 illustrated novel by Brian Aldiss, plunges straight into its invented world. A lawyer (Jonathan Pryce) treks across a desolate patch of the eastern England coastline to the home of twins Tom and Barry Howe, where father Albert (Roger Watkins) signs a contract.
This turns out to be a scene from an unfinished movie, appealingly titled "Two-Way Romeo," by helmer Ken Russell (playing himself). Russell straightfacedly notes he saw the pic as about "the loss and exploitation of innocence." Author Brian Aldiss (James Greene) adds simply that "it's all incredibly Gothic."
Per usual biodocu style, pic backgrounds the quieter Tom (Harry Treadaway) and more manic Barry (Luke Treadaway). Born joined in the lower chest, and raised in the bleak fens of Norfolk, they were spotted by Zak Bedderwick (Howard Attfield), a down-on-his-luck band manager. Notes one observer: "Zak wanted singing Siamese twins -- and he wanted them pop."
Fulton and Pepe move freely between interviews in the present and docu footage from the past -- latter shot by American documaker Eddie Pasqua (Tom Bower) -- as well as stirring in clips from the increasingly outre "Two-Way Romeo," in which the twins develop a malicious third head. Initial effect is dizzyingly dense, but dialogue is so right-on for its era and period detail so real that the mockumentary sucks the viewer into its created world.
Dubbing the act the Bang Bang, the massively untalented twins stumble to success in a haze of drugs and booze before a woman, sexy Laura Ashworth (Diana Kent, Tania Emery, both excellent), tears them apart. Black humor pushes the envelope in scenes of the twins' conjoined sex lives, and like most mockus, "Brothers" starts treading water in its final reels. Still, Grissoni's dialogue catches the genre's emotional cliches so accurately -- even down to a pathos-filled ending -- that pic's downtime is relatively small.
Lensing by Anthony Dod Mantle ("28 Days Later," "Manderlay") is quietly skilful, from the burnished sheen of clips from Russell's movie to Pasqua's fly-on-the-wall B&W docu. Performances by the largely no-name cast are spot-on.
 Camera (color/B&W), Anthony Dod Mantle; editor, Nicolas Gaster; music/original songs, Clive Langer; production designer, Jon Henson; art director, Patrick Rolfe; costume designer, Marianne Agertoft; sound (Dolby Digital), Tim Barker; assistant director, Mike Elliott; casting, Nina Gold. Reviewed on DVD, Berlin, Jan. 30, 2006. (In Berlin Film Festival -- Panorama; also in Toronto Film Festival -- Visions.) Running time: 88 MIN.

 


 
 


 

This mockumentary tracks the rise and fall of a conjoined-twin glam-rock act (played by Luke and Harry Treadaway , with the aid of prosthetics) in polysexual, Performance -era England, but the tone is anything but mocking. Directors Keith Fulton  and Louis Pepe , who made the Terry Gilliam /Don Quixote  doc Lost in La Mancha , avoid Behind the Music  snark, focusing instead on period textures and oddball details (weirdest of all, an aborted Ken Russell  biopic). The golden-hued footage is lovingly faked by ace cinematographer Anthony Dod Mantle , and the straight-faced result is as improbably touching as the Farrelly brothers ' underrated Stuck on You .
