 “The Business of Being Born” is a passionate ground-level examination of home childbirth, anchored in a scene in which its executive producer, Ricki Lake, the actress and former talk-show host, gives birth to her second child in a bathtub. That graphic scene, and several other unblinking sequences of home birth attended by a midwife, are intended to erase any stigma from the situation.  Practiced widely in Europe and Japan, home birth has largely disappeared in the United States, the documentary states,  because of an  image as a primitive, unsanitary ritual.  The statistics cited in the film suggest that the revolution in childbirth from home to hospital was spurred by technology, which  increasingly turned it into a surgical procedure involving multiple, often unnecessary interventions. In 1900 95 percent of births in the United States took place at home. By 1938 the number had shrunk to half. Today the number is less than 1 percent.  As the film enumerates disadvantages of hospital births, conspiracy theorists might detect a plot by the medical establishment to take  control of a process for both economic and psychological reasons. But the medical establishment would argue that a hospital is the safest place to give birth because if something goes wrong, speed is essential. “The Business of Being Born” is not overtly political. Its feminism is palpable but unspoken.  Here are some of the disadvantages laid out in the film: Obstetricians  have surgical training,  but the film contends that many have never seen a fully natural birth and are therefore unprepared to  supervise one. Because hospitals are businesses that thrive on a high turnover, drugs to induce and speed labor (and that often make it more intense and painful) serve the system by filling and emptying beds at a faster rate.  There are horror stories here of widely accepted medical practices that were subsequently shown to be dangerous to a newborn. The administration of the drug scopolamine in the ’40s, ’50s and ’60s was supposed to stop pain but, the documentary says,  eliminated the memory of pain, often leaving the  mother suffering post-traumatic stress. The taking of X-rays of the pelvis was common until the discovery that some babies developed cancer as a result.  The use of the infamous drug thalidomide for morning sickness was found to cause birth defects. In the 1990s the drug Cytotec to stimulate contractions was found to cause ruptured uteruses.  The movie sharply criticizes the “lithotomy” position, in which the mother, lying on her back, is encouraged to “push.” Because it makes the pelvis smaller, that position increases the likelihood of having to deliver a baby with forceps or a vacuum extractor. Squatting is much less stressful for the mother, but more so for the doctor, who must catch the  baby. The natural births in the film, including Ms. Lake’s, are carried out in a squatting position in warm water with a midwife and loved ones at hand.  The one exception in the movie is the breach-birth hospital delivery of Abby Epstein, the film’s director and one of its producers. (Her husband, Paulo Netto, is one of its producers as well as its cinematographer.) The movie’s recognition that natural childbirth in the home isn’t the answer for everyone keeps “The Business of Being Born” from turning into a one-note polemic.  Increasingly, the use of a Caesarean section, once the last resort in the event of an emergency, has become commonplace because it is so efficient. But as one expert after another points out, a C-section is major surgery. Although a woman’s first C-section poses few risks, the dangers of serious complications increase with each repetition. It is also very expensive.  The cost of our blind trust in hospital technology, the film implies, is reflected in the United States infant-mortality rate,  the second-highest in industrialized countries. What accounts for that fact?  “The Business of Being Born” suggests that a cultural aversion to natural home childbirth is a contributing factor.

Highly informative expose "The Business of Being Born" makes a strong case for natural childbirth and an even stronger case for having a baby anywhere besides a U.S. hospital. Directed by Abby Epstein and exec produced by Ricki Lake, who appears on camera throughout (even giving birth nude in her bathtub), docu seems best suited to cable: Lake's informal, Oprah-like concern invites the intimacy of home viewing. But the chick-chat approach in no way undermines the gravity of the problems the docu addresses, and "Business" could conceivably get rerouted to theatrical venues in the wake of Michael Moore's soon-to-be-released health care-themed "Sicko."
The statistics are sobering: Though the United States spends almost twice as much as any other nation on delivering babies, the rate of infant mortality is the second worst in the developed world. Docu cites several causes, particularly the absence of midwives from most hospitals, and a cycle of methods that seeks to impose artificial time constraints on a natural process, with an eye toward the bottom line.
Helmer Epstein approaches her subject from a dual perspective: She visits with midwives and their patients as they go through the various stages of home birth, and she lays out a fairly terrifying history, complete with archival photographs and footage, tracing the practices of hospital births.
The graphically documented home births are shown as supportive, quite painful yet infinitely rewarding. Any claim the docu may have to objectivity is limited not only by Lake being shown giving birth (the event which inspired her to help make the film), but also by Epstein herself becoming pregnant midway through the pic, unexpectedly providing the docu's most suspenseful moments.
In contrast, cartoony diagrams and sped-up montages illustrate the drug-induced assembly line of hospital delivery. Pic argues that the unnecessary medical interferences, the increase in Cesarean births for the sake of "convenience" and trendiness ("too posh to push") all conspire to institute a mechanical regimen that, in some cases, is inimical to the health of mother and baby. A brief history of prior birthing practices does nothing to instill confidence in the medical establishment's method du jour.

Interspersed throughout, a wide range of talking heads, midwives, doctors, administrators and theorists support the pic's point of view. One might wish a somewhat whimsical French OB/GYN did not refer to the body's release of hormones during natural childbirth, ensuring the mother's bond with her newborn, as a "love cocktail," but the scientific point is well taken nonetheless.
Tech credits are adequate, the inhouse informality of the film heightened by the fact that lenser Paulo Netto did double duty as the expectant father of Epstein's child.
Camera (color, DV), Paulo Netto; editor, Madeleine Gavin; sound, Matthew Israel. Reviewed on DVD, New York, May 8, 2007. (In Tribeca Film Festival -- Discovery.) Running time: 87 MIN.
 


Most of the advance buzz about The Business of Being Born  has centered around an image of its producer, Ricki Lake . Naked. Giving birth. In a bathtub. If you couldn't handle the crowning scene in Knocked Up , you should probably pass on this one; not only is Lake's real labor about a million times more explicit (she flops and writhes for a long while, then a gunk-covered infant slowly emerges from between her legs), but we see quite a few other women popping out babies as well, in every imaginable contortion. Even the director, Abby Epstein , joins the club, turning the camera on her own attempt at natural childbirth for her doc about the birthing biz. The tone of the film is polemical, occasionally strident, and some of its balder assertions need to be taken with a damn big grain of salt (one "expert" claims that mothers don't bond with babies delivered by c-section, and that the proliferation of caesarians in the West portends the end of love). There's also an obliviously upper-class, sanctimoniously yuppie-crunchy slant to the whole production. Still, Epstein and Lake have crafted an absorbing, thought-provoking inquiry into what modern birth has become and how to make it better.
