 Set in 1981 during the early days of the Israeli settler movement, Joseph Cedar's film "Campfire" has come under fire from religious Jews for its portrayal of a group of early settlers on the West Bank as repressive, self-righteous hypocrites. As Mr. Cedar remarks dryly in the film's production notes, the early settler movement was peopled by "mostly middle-class citizens who used the political atmosphere of the time as an excuse to take advantage of what they considered a good real estate opportunity."  Applying for membership in a rural settlement that has yet to be built is Rachel Gerlik (Michaela Eshet), a lonely, 42-year-old widowed mother of two teenage girls. Acceptance of this fractured family into the community requires that Rachel remarry as quickly as possible. Both children are bitterly opposed to her joining the group.  Beyond casting a jaundiced eye at the community's oppressive communalism, "Campfire" neither endorses nor opposes the settler movement that since 1981 has become an incendiary issue in Israel. But that Mr. Cedar is an Orthodox Jew and former Israeli paratrooper stationed on the West Bank has added to the sting of betrayal felt by the religious conservatives who have boycotted his film.  Despite that hostility, "Campfire" has been warmly embraced by Israel's secular Jews. It won five Israeli Academy Awards, including best picture, director and screenplay,  and was that country's Oscar nominee for best foreign film of 2005.  Its broader political implications within Israel notwithstanding, "Campfire" offers an outsider an intimate portrait of family members living in uncomfortably close proximity and straining against one another during a difficult period of transition. Rachel, a tough, attractive woman whose husband died of cancer a year earlier, is tugged this way and that by conflicting desires. She longs for the security and companionship of the community. But because her first marriage was unhappy, she is unwilling to settle for another husband who won't deliver the romantic fireworks the first one didn't provide.  The older daughter, Esti (Maya Maron), blames her father's rapid deterioration from his disease on what she sees as Rachel's neglect and enrages her mother by taking a soldier to the house for sex. The younger daughter, 15-year-old Tami (Hani Furstenberg), is shy but curious about boys; this curiosity precipitates the crisis at the center of the film.  The couple heading the acceptance committee - smug, portly Motkeh (Assi Dayan) and his cold, pragmatic wife, Shula (Edith Teperson) - are the kind of rigid, narrow-minded people you wouldn't want to tangle with on a co-op board. Shula arranges dates for Rachel with two possible candidates for a husband, but when Rachel balks at choosing either one, she loses patience. Neither Yossi (Moshe Ivgy), a kindly 50-year-old bus driver and sad sack who has never slept with a woman and who falls instantly in love with Rachel, nor Moshe (Yehoram Gaon), a plump, self-satisfied cantor, comes close to meeting her pyrotechnical standards.  A crisis erupts when Tami follows a boy on whom she has a crush to a raucous gathering at a holiday bonfire, where a pack of teenage boys are singing lewd songs. The bully of the gang grabs Tami, forces kisses on her, then coerces the other boys to do the same, promising to release her only if she will go further.  This ugly scene of peer pressure and molestation has instant repercussions. As word of the incident spreads, graffiti is sprayed on the outside of the Gerlik house, calling Tami a slut, and Rachel's ability to control her daughters is questioned by the acceptance committee. Motkeh urges Rachel to forget the incident and not report it to the police.  If "Campfire" is solidly acted, it is visually drab and has a haphazard narrative momentum. Even when it visits the site of the future settlement, the camera finds little beauty in the landscape. The movie finally comes apart in a cheery, saccharine finale that feels tacked on, the way a cheap mint consumed after an unpalatable meal is supposed to erase the bad taste with a jolt of sugar.

Despite being fueled by romantic yearnings and sexual assault, Israeli family drama "Campfire" fails to spark. Pic juggles several storylines that include the personal and political, but is unable to get beyond soap-opera shtick. Characters behave erratically -- calm when things are at crisis and insane when little is at stake. Jewish-themed fests may mull this one, but only if they're desperate for product.
Despite being fueled by romantic yearnings and sexual assault, Israeli family drama "Campfire" fails to spark. Pic juggles several storylines that include the personal and political, but is unable to get beyond soap-opera shtick. Characters behave erratically -- calm when things are at crisis and insane when little is at stake. Jewish-themed fests may mull this one, but only if they're desperate for product.

Set in 1981, film begins with widowed Rachael (Michaela Eshet) emerging from a year of mourning. A mother of two, she's ready to be romanced once more, but is less prepared for the sexual awakenings of her teenage daughters, the rebellious Esty (Maya Maron) and the younger, sweet but sexually curious Tami (Hani Furstenburg). Latter finds herself in hot water while attending an overnight bonfire celebration with her Zionist youth group. Pic is ambiguous about whether Tami is actually raped or just molested but, regardless, gossip blazes through the community. Script grinds-on mechanically and ends clunkily. Performances are amiable but wooden, though scenes between Rachael and her 50-year-old virgin beau, Yossi (Moshe Ivgy), are more touching. Lensing is flat; other credits good.
Camera (color, 35mm), Ofer Inov; editor, Einat Glaser Zarhin; music, Ofer Shalchim; art director, Miguel Merkin; costume designer, Laura Sheim. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Forum), Feb. 9, 2004. Running time: 96 MIN.
 


For the right-wing Jerusalemites of this wannabe incendiary period drama, to settle is to settle is to settle. In the Israel -circa-1981 equivalent of suburban flight, recently widowed Rachel (Michaela Eshet ) tries to join the founding group of a West Bank  religious settlement along with her two teenage daughters. Ideologically extreme, sure, but she digs the real estate opportunity and potential for social acceptance. Invariably, though, this Noah's ark is a couples-only expedition: Does Rachel want the high-class cantor/egoist or the sweet, pitiable 50-year-old virgin (Moshe Ivgy )?
As it tracks Rachel's daughters, the film takes a blunt, aggressive detour into gender politics, boldly equating nationalism with rape and settling with, well, putting out. It's the overblown kicker in a movie loaded with loud metaphors, and we're eventually grounded in this disturbing micro/macro logic: A girl who won't fight for independence might end up occupied territory.
American-born, Israeli-raised filmmaker Joseph Cedar  certainly aims to provoke—his muddled debut, Time of Favor , followed a young Orthodox soldier's attempt to blow up the Dome of the Rock —but his aesthetics are too conventional to provide the requisite gut-punch. Still, the timelier elements of Campfire , which cleared house at Israel's Academy Awards  this year, are too salient to dismiss. The film points an accusatory finger at the pioneers' primitive social dynamics and propaganda peddling. Pre-military teens get pumped with screenings of Entebbe : Operation Thunderbolt  while the Palestinian question is conspicuously brushed under the rug. Campfire's awkwardly triumphant final image, which could easily transplant to 2005, begs the question, Good work, but where are we headed?
