 The kind-hearted triumph and the wicked get theirs in "Cape of Good Hope," a genuine uplift of a film that even the most diehard cynics will find hard to resist. Set in gorgeous Cape Town, Mark Bamford's energizing first feature revolves around a group of animal-shelter workers and their significant counterparts, as they contend with varying states of loneliness and gaping voids in their lives.  In addition to the abandoned dogs that yearn for food, homes and affection, a Muslim couple struggle to have a baby, while a refugee from Congo (played by the tremendously charismatic Eriq Ebouaney) must choose between a long-awaited chance for "freedom" (a ticket to Canada) and his love for a woman and her young son. And in the central storyline, the good-natured local veterinarian, who lost his wife to cancer, finds himself drawn to Kate (Debbie Brown), the emotionally frigid shelter founder, who is in turn carrying on a self-destructive relationship with a married scoundrel.  Though issues of race, immigration and gender politics are ever so tactfully present, Mr. Bamford never force-feeds lectures or clichés. Instead, he admirably adheres to his primary objective of concentrating on his large cast of compelling and utterly believable characters. Witnessing Kate thaw out is just one of the many pleasures this satisfying and memorable film has to offer.  "Cape of Good Hope" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has strong language, sexual content and violence. (No animals are killed.

Good-natured, multi-character snapshot of contemporary South Africa depends on the warmth and charm of its indigenous cast to flesh out script's formulaic situations. An animal rescue center forms the nucleus around which a French West African astronomer, a tangoing veterinarian, a college student/mother/maid and a troubled blond animal lover orbit and intersect, while self-serving black ministers and abusive white nabobs get their comeuppance. Although by now routine, the intertwining of separate story strands is solidly structured, and the different mini-narratives resolved in unsurprising yet satisfying ways. Crowd-pleasing, feel-good exercise in love and tolerance could click in arthouse and indie markets.
"Hope" plays as a more old-fashioned, less offbeat version of "Italian for Beginners," with the animal center substituting for the language course as a shelter for assorted, troubled souls. Kate (Debbie Brown), founder and head of the animal rescue mission, has serious abandonment issues. Her father left her long ago and her pathetically age-defying mother, layers of jewelry vying with coats of rouge, is inching toward her fifth wedding.
Involved with an unseen married man, Kate initially avoids the shy attentions of the local vet (Morn Visser), who has recently lost his wife to cancer.
Meanwhile, Jean-Claude (Eriq Ebouaney), a distinguished refugee astronomer seeking political asylum from the Congo, is forced to work in dead-end jobs: The least demeaning is working with the animals at the shelter. Yet, as portrayed by the gifted, charismatic Ebouaney (the title character in Raoul Peck's "Lumumba"), Jean-Claude can not only enchant children and make women fall in love with him at first sight, he can even turn a snarling "white dog," trained to attack blacks, into a tail-wagging household pet.
A young black widow Lindiwe (Nthati Moshesh) frantically juggles going to college, working as a maid, and raising her spirited son (Kamo Masilo). Neither her college professor nor her boss nor her mother is willing to cut her the least amount of slack, their demands impossibly high, their expectations depressingly low.
Rounding out the cast of characters is a Muslim couple (Juanita Adams and David Isaacs), grappling with culture-tangled problems of infertility that threaten their eight-year marriage. The picture is bleak, particularly for the black characters, trapped in poverty and unemployment and forced to contend with every form of residual racism.
First-time helmer Mark Bamford, co-scripting with wife Suzanne Kay, deals in amiable cliches. Yet scenes like the one where Kate wakes up alone in a motel room, her lover a no-show, while back at the ranch the dogs shake their empty food bowls or otherwise express their displeasure at her absence, come off with flair, humor and unforced pathos, due in part to the excellent human and canine thesping but also to Bamford's fine sense of timing.
Larry Fong's lensing maintains pic's upbeat tone, finding pleasing compositions in location shot shantytowns without overly prettifying them. Other tech credits smartly follow suit.
Camera (color, widescreen), Larry Fong; editor, Frank Reynolds; music, J.B. Eckl; production designer, David Barkham, costume designer, Reza Levy; casting, Christa Schamberger. Reviewed at Tribeca Film Festival (Showcase), May 5, 2004. (Also in Cannes Film Festival -- market.) Running time: 107 MIN.

 


If you're going to see only one South African film this year, will you go for the idiosyncratic fable doc or the glossy-schmaltzy feel-good travel ad? The authentic nature of the post-apartheid state in either case is merely background, but in Jeppe Rønde's The Swenkas , the odd escapist subculture explored is almost by definition a reaction to political powerlessness. Apparently, for generations, rural laborers that come to Johannesburg  for work have been indulging in "swenking": spending a portion of their hard-earned wages on designer suits, silk ties, and top-of-the-line shoes and competing in public (and often semi-public) style-maven contests every weekend. Cash prizes are at stake, and over the decades these mime battles of double-breasted panache have taken on a distinctive performance quality, inciting the various Zulu men to vogue, fox-trot, solo-tango, prance, display their outfits' materials like game show hostesses, and generally attempt to wordlessly impress upon the judges (who are they ?) that a cresting degree of macho chic has been achieved.
The swenkas live otherwise ordinary hardscrabble lives, but their obsession isn't a vice—on the contrary, it is a sign of prestige and achievement, the mantle of which is often passed down proudly from father to son. Framing his material with a fictional narrator who in turn describes the action as a whimsical frontier tale, Rønde doesn't say a word about swenking's ethnographic roots, but as it's presented here, it seems like the organic, postmodern adaptation of pre-colonial ritual, a GQ   version of tribal masquerade, by which masculinity and social brilliance are measured. This peculiar and sweet film—which lushly scores the silent tournaments with Henry Mancini  and Tommy Dorsey —more or less leaves it at that, exploiting the poetic surreality of the overdressed Zulus in Pierre Cardin  primping in the basements and barren fields of the Transvaal but resisting the urge to contextualize or explain it.
Another South Africa  altogether arises in Cape of Good Hope  , a self-consciously upbeat paean to the new multiculti-ism that centers on a Cape Town  dog hospice (puppyish reaction shots abound) and trails after a handful of racially varied do-gooders as they sort out their clichéd romantic lives. Everyone smiles far too much. As the lead whitey with a deliciously zaftig figure and a Colgate  grin, Debbie Brown  is passable; only Nthati Moshesh, as a single black mother working as a housekeeper wooed by a displaced Congolese (Eriq Ebouaney ), makes a dent in white-American-expatriate Mark Bamford 's toothless scenario.
Tipping the scale alongside The Swenkas  is Fast Film  (2003), a short by Austrian Virgil Widrich, a popular fest filmmaker entranced with the potentialities of photocopies. Set on a runaway train made up entirely of animated film images copied, torn, wrinkled, and cut and starring everyone from Cary Grant  to Harrison Ford , Fast Film  is easily the best action film of the year, and so fiercely witty it blanches any other meta-movie project in sight (like, say, Kiss Kiss, Bang Bang ).
