 With a surrogate for every demographic and a heroine for every taste, “Casi Divas” jiggles and jokes its way around as many Mexican box-office bases as possible. Such calculated commercialism, however, doesn’t preclude loftier goals, and as the film picks up speed it also accrues a socially progressive agenda. If only this were half as well developed as the female leads.  Harnessing the familiar tropes of the pageant drama, the writer and director, Issa Lopez, introduces us to four young competitors vying for the lead in the film version of a popular telenovela. There’s a shy country beauty hiding behind a unibrow (Maya Zapata); a ruthless banker’s daughter still smarting from the humiliations of a pudgy past (Ana Layevska); a theatrical hairstylist from an unsavory section of Mexico City (Daniela Schmidt); and a troubled factory worker from Ciudad Juárez who lives in constant fear of being kidnapped (Diana Garcia).  Touching on racism (one contestant is Mexican Indian), ageism and homophobia (a surprise I won’t divulge), Ms. Lopez keeps the tone light and the emphasis on self-knowledge. The fusion of social consciousness and slapstick can grate, but the young actresses are appealing (most notably Ms. Garcia) and the message innocuous: Friends matter more than money, the poor matter more than the rich, and the wounded matter most of all. Who can argue with any of that?  “Casi Divas” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Sex as gift, bribe, weapon and burden.

"Casi divas," Mexican writer-director Issa Lopez's gloriously flamboyant comedic extravaganza, fuses soap opera and "American Idol"-type competition, following four wildly different women vying for the star role in a feature filmization of a popular telenovela. Rather than settling for a lampoon of TV sudsers a la "Tootsie" or "Soapdish," Lopez wittily stresses tensions between form and content. She invests her characters with emotions that register as all the deeper for being superficially presented via pop-culture cliches. "Divas," which bows Aug. 21 in limited release, could evolve into that rarity, a Hispanic film with broad-based cross-cultural appeal. 
The quartet of featured hopefuls dying to be cast in the title role of "Maria Enamorada" are slyly introduced through mini-biopics that mimic prepackaged backstories, yet Lopez artfully alters the generic style of each to reflect societal prejudice. Francisca (Maya Zapata), a Zapoteca Indian from the Oaxaca hinterlands, is framed in bucolic settings, her hick naivete emphasized by the awkward, jumpy editing. Political correctness will dictate her inclusion among the finalists, while racism will guarantee images of the Guadalajara high life -- beauty treatments, tagalong maids, a guard dog and a fat-cat banker father.
Next, a field of crosses heralds Catalina (Diana Garcia), a militant factory worker in Cuidad Juarez, where women have been murdered with impunity for decades: She defiantly holds up posters of the dead and disappeared. Far from this straight-ahead, docu-style presentation is the splashy multimedia spectacle accompanying beauty parlor queen Yesenia (Daniela Schmidt), who headlines glitzy dance numbers with her flaming gay pals and has showbiz running through her veins.
The contestants' dreams, family dramas, romances and social struggles -- rendered as pastoral reverie, sitcom schtick or dread-filled horror -- are intercut with the melodramatic antics of soap vet Eva Gallardo (Patricia Llaca), who has played Maria Enamorada on TV since the series' inception. Furious at being supplanted in the movie version by a much younger unknown, Eva pulls every conceivable dirty trick to blackmail her ex-lover/producer Alejandro (Julio Bracho) into giving her the role. Alejandro, whose passion for his aging Galatea runs hot even as his sardonic appreciation of her histrionics runs cool, orchestrates the pageantry with consummate showmanship and surprising compassion. Pic's generic ending, however, is overly pat.
Tech credits, including a score by Hans Zimmer, revel in colorful extravagance without tawdriness.

Casi Divas , a none-too-clever but hustling-to-please Mexican comedy, concerns a diverse citizenship drawn together across dividing lines—of race, class, sexuality, gender (re)assignment—by the embrace of pop monoculture. With predictable reservations, this seems a good thing to director Issa López , a pioneer in pumping American studio money into a bottomed-out Mexican film industry (though this time, she's on Columbia's dime, with Hans Zimmer  imported to pluck out a score). A popular telenovela soap opera producer announces a nationwide search for a new leading lady to debut in an upcoming film adaptation. The Mexico City lights draw Catalina (Diana Garcia ) from the factories of Ciudad Juárez , where disappearing co-workers join the city's staggering figures of unsolved homicides. Francisca (Maya Zapata ), a Zapotec Indian, represents rural Oaxaca , while local Yesenia (Daniela Schmidt ) is, secretly, the most disenfranchised of all. An appealing cast smiles away through turbulent tone-shifts, as López piles on social problems until the film resembles a landmark. Like a populist politician furiously pumping hands on the campaign trail, pandering to a gallery of representative stereotypes, you'll admire the energy even while knowing better than to trust the everything-to-everyone gestures.
