
Sometimes when I'm feeling bored at the gym, I like to wonder about some of the unreasonably attractive men and women working out around me. Are they scientists? Are they spelunkers? Are they spelunking scientists? And if so, what would they do if, while on an expedition, they suddenly found themselves trapped a mile underground with fanged, digitized creatures that had no problem treating them like kibble? Luckily, I can put some of my curiosity to rest, because I've just seen ''The Cave," which answers every question I've ever had about what might happen when a handful of hotties head deep inside the earth. For starters, the middle-aged and intelligent die early.
Sorry, Dr. Nicolai (Marcel Iures), but you seem several decades older and many times smarter than the team of young American cave explorers you've hired to help guide you through the mysterious subterranean labyrinth you've found in Eastern Europe. Plus your foreign accent isn't British -- so it was nice knowing you. But hey, somebody does get gobbled up before you (though I didn't catch his name). As for the ones who've survived up to this point, they seem to have lunged out of an energy drink commercial. If the movie's sets weren't dank and soggy, we would see the Gatorade they probably sweat while trying to make their way back to the surface.
''The Cave" is hard to get into, if for no other reason than, like ''Wrong Turn," ''House of Wax," the ''Anaconda" sequel, and others, it's ultimately just a rigorous personal training film made by people who don't seem to like movies or the people who go to them. With nary a shot lasting longer than five seconds, it's not edited so much as blended. When it's finally over, we're not left with a horror film. We're stuck holding a protein shake.
In the meantime, the cast is a who's who of who's thats. The man running the expedition, Jack, is played by Cole Hauser, the star of last fall's ''Paparazzi." Eddie Cibrian, of ESPN's gambling drama ''Tilt," plays his brother, Tyler. Piper Perabo, that lass whose career hasn't been the same since ''Coyote Ugly," plays the obligatory tomboy obligatorily named Charlie. Lena Headey plays the British scientist, over whom the brothers seem bound to fight but never do. Daniel Dae Kim and Rick Ravanello play two other guys, and -- because it's becoming a crime for Hollywood not to make one of these movies without him -- Morris Chestnut reprises his part from that more enjoyably absurd ''Anaconda" sequel.
Together, they don't act so much as burn carbs. At the first sign of trouble, everybody treats the slippery cave as a climbing wall and uses the monster-stocked lake as a chance to get in a swim. No one seems exactly afraid of these critters. They seem pumped. Of course, the monsters are scary only if you've never been to an ''Aliens" movie (Cibrian faced down much more frightening creatures when he was on ''Sunset Beach"). Nonetheless, we take our cues from our heroes in such pictures. But what do our actors give us to work with?
The acting here is the stuff you come to expect from a cabinet, or whoever the woman is playing the prosecutor on ''Law & Order." Hauser in particular seems on the verge of turning his cardboard technique, which includes a bold refusal to inflect, into an art. In fact, he appears to be so masculine that you're afraid he might go off like a testosterone bomb. When it seems one of the creatures has infected him, someone observes, ''He's not human." But come on, was he ever?



Diverting rather than outright scary, "The Cave" is nonetheless a furiously paced sci-fi horror adventure featuring virtuoso cinematography and editing that give the film visual panache. Cole Hauser heads a team of cave explorer/deep sea divers who investigate a vast and treacherous cavern in Romania, full of immense, eerily beautiful chambers, impossibly narrow passages, steep cliffs, rushing rapids and waterfalls. This is the awesome realm of the unknown, and danger lurks everywhere, especially from ever-evolving micro-ecologies, which have actually been discovered in caves in Romania and elsewhere.
 
  Consequently, there is a kernel of scientific basis for the unexpected, albeit exaggerated, challenges awaiting Hauser's team. Directed with admirable energy and clarity by Bruce Hunt and crisply acted, "The Cave" is a polished and ambitious production, and its makers don't lose sight of their primary goal to generate thrills and chills. It's increasingly hard to work up a fright on the screen these days, but even if "The Cave" doesn't exactly terrify, it's fun and looks great.
 
   "The Cave,"
 rated PG-13 for intense creature violence. Running time: 1 hour, 37 minutes. In general release.
 
 --Kevin Thomas

 Having worked as second- and third-unit director on the "Matrix" trilogy and "Dark City," Bruce Hunt is no stranger to inspired and stylish productions. But whereas those films managed to inject new life into tired territory, "The Cave," his first effort as director, fails to generate anything resembling innovation.  A group of ace cave-divers are flown in to investigate an intricate maze system discovered beneath the ruins of an ancient Romanian abbey. Without much explanation the gung-ho team - and two scientists - are lowered uncomfortably deep into the earth. It doesn't take long to learn that they are not alone, and are soon being preyed upon by what look like cheap creature rejects from the "Alien" films, except these demonlike mutations can fly and use sonar to see in the dark.  What is left of the plot amounts to guessing who will be killed off next out of the token Asian and African-American guys, the girl in the skimpy outfit, the sexy female scientist with an English accent and the testosterone-pumped combative brothers. Not that it matters much - the characters are so colorless and underdeveloped that their deaths certainly won't be mourned.  As utterly formulaic as the film may be, the elements for an edge-of-the-seat crowd-pleaser are, in theory, all present: a closed-off environment ideal for creating no-one-can-hear-you-scream suspense; stimulating underwater and wall-climbing action; exotic settings, shot on location in Bucharest and the Yucatán; and bloodthirsty villains.  It's a shame, a travesty even, that the filmmakers seem to have forgotten that in order to keep viewers from contemplating the absurdity of what they are watching the action must move at a pace that doesn't allow for it. But not only is the film dreadfully dull: every time something potentially exciting does occur, the scenes are so muddled and chaotic that it is impossible to make out what is happening.  As the leader of the expedition, Cole Hauser attempts his best Vin Diesel impersonation but fails to deliver even at this rudimentary level. The rest of the actors turn in performances right out of the casting room, as if they were reading the lines from the appallingly bad script for the very first time, embarrassed to discover that it's all been done before. And will indeed be done again. Let's just hope it won't be in a "Cave" sequel, a possibility the film's ending distressingly leaves open.  "The Cave" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some violence.

Even though it's skulking into theaters toward the end of a summer surprisingly short on fearsome creature movies, "The Cave" feels stunningly familiar as it goes through the rote edicts of the scientific crew vs. toothy beastie formula. Refreshing strokes of science-fact in the early sections give way to action strictly from the Ridley Scott-James Cameron playbook, but without a powerful helmer behind the camera or a memorable cast in front. Pic is getting a suitably quick and quiet sendoff theatrically, where it will gobble up some lackadaisical coin en route to decent video scares.
Seven-minute prelude set in Romania's Carpathian Mountains in the mid-'70s shows a diving team foolishly trying to explore a deep cave which had been capped (a la "The Exorcist: The Beginning") by a church adorned with mosaics depicting knights being defeated by winged creatures.
Science steps in 30 years later with Dr. Nicolai (Marcel Iures) leading an expedition into the same caves, and hiring a crack crew of caver/divers led by Jack (Cole Hauser).
Tyro director and vet second unit director Bruce Hunt appears considerably more interested in the technology and gorgeous environments studied by these explorer-biologists than in the characters, which serves the film's early mood as a science-fact adventure. For a while, "The Cave" actually feels like a dramatized version of an IMAX pic, except when certain routine character "complications" are inserted in Michael Steinberg and Tegan West's screenplay -- such as the testy sibling relations between Jack and brother Tyler (Eddie Cibrian).
Filling out the crew are Top (Morris Chestnut), Briggs (Rick Ravanello), Strode (Kieran Darcy-Smith),ace climber Charlie (Piper Perabo) and biologists Kathryn (Lena Headey ) and Kim (Daniel Dae Kim). They are ready for a plunge down into the enormous caverns under the Carpathians, convinced that they may be finding one of the world's largest and least explored subterranean systems.
But, of course, those monsters depicted in the ancient mosaics turn out to be all too real, and pick off crew members one by one in true "Alien" tradition (with creature designer Patrick Tatopoulos unimaginatively borrowing from H.R. Giger's model).
The creatures (there's more than one) are able to feed off any host rather than consuming them whole. This is where pic borrows from "The Thing," with intimations that Jack has become infected and may turn into one of the beasts.
Pic contains some surprises in this department, but the most consistent problem with "The Cave" is the cave itself, which makes tracking what's going on virtually impossible. Only in a silly, pyrotechnical finale in a single vast cave is the viewer clear on the visual relationships between human victims and the creatures.
A last twist in a Mittel-Europa street cafe provides a little for the thesps to work with (as well as the rather unlikely suggestion of a sequel), but otherwise, these are thankless roles that must have been arduous to play.
Hauser escapes partly from his usual typecast bad guy role with this turn as a hero with a major health problem, while Headey is burdened with providing the regularly inserted scientific explanations.
Ross Emery's widescreen lensing provides visual depth and sheen, aided by Wes Skiles' superb underwater camerawork. Editor Brian Berdan ensures that things move at a sharp clip, though Johnny Klimek and Reinhold Heil's score is a mixed bag of cool electronics and paltry "Jaws" borrowings.

Spare and single-minded, The Cave  is an insistently entertaining piece of pulp. Dispensing with backstory in the credit sequence, it barrels swiftly toward the eponymous maw, where our group of strapping young explorers soon find themselves in monstrous peril. Cole Hauser  leads the brow-furrowing troupe with laconic intensity, remaining impossibly calm as the alien cum pterodactyl slobbers all over their wet suits. Quips fall flat and personalities are nonexistent, but no matter: The kick here is in the tension and release. Bodies flop over rapids, scoot up cliffs, and tumble into a molten Tanguy landscape—shot with economy and a feel for physical pain. The settings become more imposing than the easily flammable beasts: A placid lake ominously lit with flares, a grotesquely gnarled mountain, and a high-vaulted underground cathedral all test our intrepid heroes' ingenuity. Piper Perabo 's seesawing near-escape from said mountain displays sinewy agility and rag doll fragility that are filmed with humble directness. One is so grateful for such craft that even the sequel-baiting ending can be forgiven.
