 More shocking than any of the sadistic carnage and degradation found in "Chaos" is the staggering audacity of the filmmaker David DeFalco's crediting the idea behind his brain-dead film as original.  It's an unabashed rip-off - right down to the poster taglines - of Wes Craven's 1972 "Last House on the Left" (which in turn was inspired by true events and by Ingmar Bergman's "Virgin Spring").  "Chaos" focuses on the grisly torture and murders of two teenage girls, Angelica (Chantal DeGroat) and Emily (Maya Barovich), by a group of depraved sickos - and the subsequent vengeance sought by Emily's parents.  Aside from the surprising omission of the most chilling element of "Last House" - that the brutal crimes take place just outside shouting distance of one of the girls' home - "Chaos" unspools its thievery of the earlier film with only minor details slightly altered. The ineffectual, idiotic cops are more bigoted, fueled by the fact that Emily is half black. The girls are on their way to a rave, not a concert, and are looking to score some ecstasy, not pot, before making the final mistake of their lives, following the harmless-enough-looking Swan (Sage Stallone) to the hideout of his father, known as Chaos (Kevin Gage), his father's partner and groupie/girlfriend. "Chaos" also tosses in a twist ending so preposterous that even if the action leading up to it had been effective it would have served to ruin it.  To justify making a film this gruesome and repugnant, it's essential that it be at least well crafted. But the script and the characters are cliché-ridden and the acting is atrocious, though Gage is convincingly repulsive as the lead psychopath. The girls' performances are especially laughable, making it difficult to really care about them, and watching them struggle to pull off a simple exchange of small talk is more excruciating than witnessing their graphic demise.  Unless you enjoy viewing senseless, extreme acts of rape and mutilation, stay far, far away from this one. The only thing this so-called cautionary tale will inspire audiences to do is to never sit through another insultingly awful piece of exploitative trash "conceived" by  David DeFalco.
In this era of listless PG-13 horror flicks, it's something of a relief to know that the 1970s-style exploitation shocker still exists, but Chaos  only serves as another depressing reminder of how far the genre has fallen. Two teenage girls on their way to a rave in the middle of nowhere stumble into the den of a gang headed by a drifter named Chaos (Kevin Gage ), leading to various graphic scenes of rape, torture, mutilation, etc. The reference point is obviously Wes Craven 's Last House on the Left , but Chaos  lacks the audience-implicating boldness or howling political outrage of that landmark; where Last House  was provocative, Chaos  is merely disgusting. The movie opens with a message announcing its mission "to educate and, perhaps, save lives"—presumably a joke, although the portrayal of one girl's impossibly naive parents ("Emily was raised with good family values!"), an attempt at social satire so inept as to verge on self-parody, raises some doubt. Other hints of subtext—a cop's racially charged comments, an allusion to Chaos's military past—go nowhere, but the root problem may be that the ultraviolent strategies Craven used so effectively 30 years ago don't work for today's non-shockable horror audience. Still, the film's ending, as nihilistic as Chaos himself, feels depressingly contemporary.
