 Correction Appended  Any film that dares attempt a nonjudgmental portrait of Mark David Chapman, John Lennon’s assassin, would most likely be accused of tastelessness, but in the case of “Chapter 27” — a drama based on Jack Jones’s book “Let Me Take You Down” — the charges are justified.  The film’s writer and director, J. P. Schaefer, switches between a docudrama portrait of Mr. Chapman (overplayed by Jared Leto as if he were Truman Capote’s  mouth-breathing cousin), silly flights of fancy and “Taxi Driver”-inspired subjective filmmaking meant to put us inside Mr. Chapman’s crumbling mind.  The film also acknowledges pop culture touchstones that supposedly drove Mr. Chapman to homicide, including Beatles songs and J. D. Salinger’s novel “The Catcher in the Rye”  (referred to through quotations, borrowed situations, impressionistic cutaways to rye fields and in the film’s title, which refers to a nonexistent final chapter of Mr. Salinger’s book).  None of these elements are integrated coherently enough to seem like more than postmodern noodling. And except for Judah Friedlander’s earthy, funny work as a paparazzo, most of the  performances are vague and dull, including Lindsay Lohan’s supporting turn as a Beatles fan who befriends Mr. Chapman. The character’s name is Jude. Care to guess how Chapman greets her?  “Chapter 27” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for language and some sexual content.

"Chapter 27" peers into the mind of a real-life, insane killer and finds almost nothing of interest. In order to play John Lennon's assassin Mark David Chapman, actor Jared Leto gained some 70 pounds. Seemingly following his lead, the pic itself is heavy, lethargic, and exasperating. Whether this is due to the producer-star or due to debuting writer-director Jarrett Schaefer -- or both -- this dramatization of Chapman's days in New York City leading up to the shooting yields little insight or entertainment value. Despite the presence of Lindsay Lohan (in a thankless support role), theatrical success looks about as likely as a 21st-century Beatles reunion. 
Flying in from his Hawaii home, the creepy, awkward Chapman installs himself in a YMCA, then a Sheraton, spending most of his time hanging out in front of the fabled Dakota building hoping to get an autograph from resident Lennon. But since he's brought a handgun, he presumably has a darker agenda from the start.
His repetitive verbal and voiceover ramblings show his obsessions with the Beatles and "Catcher in the Rye." He seems to think he's Holden Caulfield, sworn to avenge himself on all the "phonies" of the world, including ex-Beatle Lennon.
But since there's no background given in screenplay (a brief conversation with his unseen wife back home is the only clue to his prior life), protag's motivations are left blank.
Instead, pic gives a whopping dose of Leto with a black dye-job, pasty skin, glasses and double chin, whisper-talking in a rather actorish way, finding many excuses to doff his shirt so aud can appreciate his "Raging Bull"-style sacrifice for art. Chapman emerges more boring and irksome than scary.
Chapman meets Jude (Lohan), a local who also spends time hovering outside the Dakota, hoping for a glimpse of or word with her idol. As played in Lohan's usual likeable, naturalistic style, it strains credibility that this normal young woman would spend even a minute befriending such an obvious weirdo.
Though preem screening clocked in 16 minutes shorter than run-time given in Sundance program, "Chapter 27" still feels low on incident and high in tedium, with ideas beginning to repeat themselves halfway through. On rare occasions when something does happen -- notably when Chapman hires a prostitute -- it's a terribly obvious stab at pathos or menace.
Brief news clips reporting Lennon's death and the widespread public mourning provide some respite from pic's unrewardingly narrow focus.
While this sort of thing has certainly been done well before --"Taxi Driver" being the definitive example -- Leto and Schaefer haven't found a way of making their subject's mental illness compelling.
Feature is pro but uninspired in all departments, with Anthony Marinelli's competent but off-mark orchestral score just one more way in which "Chapter" fails to lend a seemingly sure-shot story any distinctive personality or drive.


Jared Leto  might win an Oscar next year if audiences are willing to look at Chapter 27  as an abstract of the rise to power of Perez Hilton , but Jarrett Schaefer 's film is explicitly about the mental unraveling of John Lennon  murderer Mark David Chapman , a role for which Leto gained 60 pounds and unintentionally invoked the voice of South Park 's Towelie. "I'm going to be with you, Holden . . . in the rye . . . in the ryyyyyyyyyyyeeeeeeee," drawls the actor in a seemingly pot-stoked stupor, laying on the crazy so thick you're left wondering why Chapman was let off the plane from Hawaii . Making the Fincherian The Killing of John Lennon  seem like the masterpiece Zodiac  wasn't, this misbegotten psychological portrait eagerly foregrounds Leto's excess blubber and histrionic blather, delivered like bad improv outside the Dakota building—"home of the great and powerful," according to Chapman, clearly oblivious that Rex Reed  also lives inside. A retarded sense of meta is achieved whenever Leto's Chapman goes on about the phony theatrics of film actors, but it's Lindsay Lohan , as über–Lennon fan Jude, who breaks your heart, looking convincingly horrified that she has three undeserved Razzies  while Leto has none.
