Noisy, silly, gratingly upbeat, and piously sentimental, ''Cheaper by the Dozen 2" is what passes for wholesome family entertainment these days. It's the sort of movie to send small children and grandparents out of the theater hugging each other and strong men in search of bourbon.
Any resemblance to the original 1948 bestseller ''Cheaper by the Dozen" and the ensuing 1950 movie has long been obliterated by the needs of the marketplace: The DVD player in your den is hungry, and this movie means to feed it. So we get more of what made 2003's ''Cheaper" remake an across-the-board hit: Steve Martin with his frontal lobes removed as football coach Tom Baker, Bonnie Hunt as his loving, no-nonsense wife Kate, and a sprawling brood of kids with varying degrees of attitude.
They're beginning to grow up and pull away, though, a natural process that fills Tom with panic. Oldest daughter Nora (Piper Perabo) and her husband (Jonathan Bennett) are expecting their first child, while son Charlie (Tom Welling) yearns to strike out on his own and graduating daughter Lorraine (Hilary Duff) is off to New York for a magazine internship.
In a last-ditch effort to keep the clan together, Tom rents the Wisconsin lakefront cabin at which the family once spent their summers. Nostalgia isn't what it used to be: The place is a dump, the local pack rat is more brazen than ever, and Tom's high school rival now lives across the lake with his eight children in a McMansion the size of a retirement complex.
Said rival, Jimmy Murtaugh, is played by Eugene Levy as a gloating nudnick whose tan appears to have been applied with a putty knife. Jimmy's on his third wife (Carmen Electra; the script can't decide whether she's a sensitive soul or a jiggly bimbo) and he's a taskmaster with his kids, making them spend two hours a day reading and writing.
One of Tom's brood dismisses this as ''lame," but it doesn't sound that terrible to me -- it's a lot closer, ironically, to how efficiency expert Frank Bunker Gilbreth treated his children in the original ''Cheaper by the Dozen." Kate delivers the movie's countervailing philosophy when she tells her husband, ''We give our kids love and guidance. What else is there?" Those who might offer suggestions -- ''culture," ''individual attention," ''tax-free municipal bonds" -- are obviously subversives.
Still, ''Cheaper" rolls along on well-greased wheels. The burden of the plot's little dramas falls on the younger kids, in particular Alyson Stoner as tomboy tweener Sarah. Conceiving a crush on daredevil Eliot Murtaugh (Taylor Lautner from ''The Adventures of Shark Boy and Lava Girl in 3D"), Sarah gets mopey and starts fiddling with make-up. Mom tells her ''when you like a boy, don't be anything but yourself," but then the family offers her up on a first date with a full makeover, another of the movie's weird mixed messages. Elsewhere, there's a rote romance between Charlie and the oldest Murtaugh girl (Jaime King), while Duff just looks like she'd rather be in a different movie -- she's angry and haggard here, not at all pleasant company.
The burden of slapstick falls on Martin, of course, and those of us who treasure the goofball intellectual wit of the comedian's early career may watch in dismay as Tom takes water-ski pratfalls and suffers random crotch injuries, never ceasing to grin a well-paid, defanged grin.
Your kids will laugh -- hell, my kids will laugh -- but speaking as a father, I have to say Tom Baker is one idiot patriarch too many. We're saddled with the cliche dumb daddy in ads, TV sitcoms, comic strips, but a neutered Steve Martin is the last straw. I therefore announce the founding of a new anti-defamation organization, Fathers United against Dopey Dads -- or F.U.D.D. -- and call for volunteers and greater media awareness of this slanderous stereotype. A dad is a terrible thing to waste, and ''Cheaper by the Dozen 2" is one vast, cheery wasteland.
.

         "Cheaper by the Dozen 2" proves that less is more — in comparison to the dismal "Yours, Mine & Ours" remake — that the occasional comic calamity works better than nonstop chaos and allows for a family comedy that is actually involving, even believable, and manages to be pretty funny too.
 
  Directed perceptively and energetically by Adam Shankman, this sequel to the 2003 hit is as shiny as a Christmas tree ornament yet gives full rein to Steve Martin's warm but sophisticated, richly nuanced talent and shows to advantage a large cast featuring Bonnie Hunt, Eugene Levy and Carmen Electra.
 


         






    Sam Harper's clever script turns upon a universal tug, which is the reluctance of parents to let their kids go. Faced with the news that pregnant daughter Nora (Piper Perabo) and her husband (Jonathan Bennett) will be moving to Houston and that daughter Lorraine (Hilary Duff) is off to New York, Martin's Tom Baker decides the family should have one last vacation together, at their beloved Lake Winnetka, Wis.
 
  The Bakers' 12 kids are reluctant, but Dad, with a nudge from Mom (Hunt), persuades them to agree to the plan. Clearly, the Bakers, based in the Chicago area, haven't vacationed there for some years, and the remorseless course of change that gives this comedy its shading hits home when they're faced with the ramshackle condition of the place they so enjoyed in the past. Tom rallies the troops, but a more daunting prospect looms across the lake: a lavish log palace, only slightly smaller than Old Faithful Inn, constructed by Tom's lifelong rival, Jimmy Murtaugh (Levy), who has but eight children, about a zillion bucks, a gorgeous third wife (Electra) and who now owns almost the entire resort community.
 
  Murtaugh's strict discipline has resulted in offspring who excel at everything but experience feelings of mounting rebellion toward their obnoxious martinet father. Since childhood Jimmy has been jealous of Tom for his popularity, especially with girls, and, to be sure, this ancient rivalry will flare up, but not before the Baker and Murtaugh children get to know and like each other.
 
  To his credit, Shankman smoothly forges a cast of some 25 principals to form an engaging ensemble with the focus on Martin and Levy's deft sparring. Hunt is graciously understated as a wise wife and mother, but what helps lift the film above the usual is the way in which Electra's Sarina is written and played. Despite her spectacular looks, Sarina refuses to be a mere trophy wife, wishes her husband would grow up, wants genuinely to be a good stepmother and asks Hunt's Kate for advice. Electra is delightful: She helps humanize Levy's overbearing Jimmy and thereby gives the film an unexpected dimension.
 
  Many families are likely to find "Cheaper by the Dozen 2" a holiday treat.
 
 
'Cheaper by the Dozen 2'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG for some crude humor and mild language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Appropriate family fare
 
 A 20th Century Fox release. Director Adam Shankman. Producers Shawn Levy, Ben Myron. Screenplay by Sam Harper; based on characters created by Craig Titley and based upon the novel "Cheaper by the Dozen"   

 An unnecessary sequel to a mediocre remake, "Cheaper by the Dozen 2" follows the release of the similarly themed "Yours, Mine & Ours" by a month, making any rationale for its existence all the more dubious. Sure, there always seems to be room for more lightweight family fare during the holiday season, but this messy blend of silly slapstick and oversentimentality probably won't please children, teenagers or adults.  In this edition, Tom Baker (Steve Martin) and his clan visit Lake Winnetka, which is also the regular summer dwelling of Tom's longtime archrival (Eugene Levy). Pairing Mr. Martin and Mr. Levy, whose characters' competitive antics are more infantile than those of their 20 combined children, could have produced some much-needed verve. But even they fail to inspire anything more than the occasional smile. In fact, Mr. Martin, whose presence alone made the first film tolerable, is irritatingly hyperactive, as if trapped in "wild and crazy guy" mode for no apparent reason - while his perfect wife (Bonnie Hunt) gazes at him adoringly, raising neither voice nor eyebrow, as the mayhem wreaked by her rambunctious family and pet dog escalates.  This is a tiresome film, full of repetitive, misfired jokes, false emotions and caricatures. Surprisingly, Carmen Electra, as Mr. Levy's third, much younger, airheaded wife, strikes the closest resemblance to anything human.  "Cheaper by the Dozen 2" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has some slightly raunchy humor.

A family sitcom writ very large, "Cheaper by the Dozen 2" sends the Bakers of Midland, Ill., on summer vacation, along with enough life lessons and cutely precocious kiddie dialogue to furnish an entire season of "Full House." Bland, canned but studiously professional sequel retains most of the principals from Fox's family-friendly 2003 hit, including the ever-reliable Steve Martin and Bonnie Hunt. Auds who contributed to the first "Cheaper's" $138 million domestic take should return for a second round, with homevid returns likely to eclipse any theatrical shortfall.
Despite the fact that he and wife Kate (Hunt) have 12 children, about nine of whom have yet to hit puberty, former football coach Tom Baker (Martin) is suffering from empty-nest syndrome. Oldest daughter Nora (Piper Perabo) is about to have a baby and move to Texas with husband Bud (Jonathan Bennett, filling in for Ashton Kutcher), while fashion-savvy Lorraine (Hilary Duff) is headed to New York for an internship.
The solution: one last family trip up to beautiful Lake Winnetka, Wis. But to Tom's dismay, he discovers soon after their arrival that most of the lakefront property is now owned by his childhood nemesis, the filthy-rich Jimmy Murtaugh (Eugene Levy), who has eight kids of his own as well as a dishy new wife, Sarina (Carmen Electra).
And so the stage is set for a prolonged and juvenile game of one-upsmanship between Tom and Jimmy that inevitably draws in their respective clans, punctured every so often by the stirrings of interfamily adolescent romance. Moony-eyed Charlie Baker (Tom Welling) finds himself smitten with Jimmy's daughter Anne (Jaime King), a Harvard-educated hottie who wants to become an artist.
Meanwhile, in the most engaging subplot, tomboyish Sarah Baker (Alyson Stoner) develops a crush on Eliot Murtaugh (Taylor Lautner, of "The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl in 3-D").
Tom of course is not thrilled about his kids fraternizing with the enemy (especially when said enemy has a nicer lake house and lots of expensive water-skiing gear). This sets the pattern for every conflict in Sam Harper's script, as Tom continually acts out in ways that are overbearing and embarrassing -- to the dismay of his sensible, almost too well-adjusted children -- while Kate helpfully supplies subtext along the lines of "The tighter you hold on, the harder they're gonna pull away."
Showing more commitment than the role deserves, Martin mugs up a storm -- dancing on boat docks, flailing about in a wet suit -- in his patented lovable-curmudgeon fashion. Hunt, warmly engaging as ever, gets some of the better lines and knows exactly what to do with them, even if her Kate does look unreasonably gorgeous for a mother of 12.
Levy, the juiciest addition to the cast, ultimately can't do much with a part that's all generic condescension and smothering arrogance, though he and Martin do work up a certain level of anti-chemistry.
Inheriting the helming reins from Shawn Levy (who produces with Ben Myron) is Adam Shankman, whose last film was the similarly tot-heavy "The Pacifier." Shankman directs the younger thesps to speak perfectly in turn and sometimes in unison, a quality that makes them seem about as human as the kids in "Children of the Corn." Stoner, nonetheless, is an endearingly vulnerable standout as Sarah.
When it comes to providing emotional cues, John Debney's score is as subtle as a fireworks display at a clambake -- one of the many violently staged set pieces that occasionally rupture pic's flatly polished style. Soundtrack boasts all the usual suspects, from "We Are Family" and "Why Can't We Be Friends" to Madonna's "Holiday."
