 Abel Ferrara’s ramshackle documentary “Chelsea on the Rocks” is not — I repeat not — a sober history of the Hotel Chelsea, the Manhattan landmark and artist hangout on West 23rd Street. An enraptured fantasia of high times at the hotel, the film is so intoxicated with the Chelsea’s bohemian mystique it virtually consumes itself.  Built in 1883 as an apartment cooperative, the Chelsea began operating as a hotel in 1905 and in the decades since has served as both a welcoming longtime residence and stopover for artists and musicians. Two years ago, Stanley Bard, its artist-friendly manager since the 1970s, was ousted from his position, and its future as shabby palace of art and excess remains in doubt.  The film is madly infatuated with the Chelsea’s notoriety as a nexus of sex, drugs and rock ’n’ roll. As people who have stayed there — some famous, some not — parade through the documentary, Mr. Ferrara, a sloppy interviewer whose off-screen voice is heard, pointedly (and annoyingly) refuses to give them the usual identifying titles. One of the wild men of American cinema, Mr. Ferrara adores them all, demonstrating special affection for the most eccentric, cantankerous and self-destructive.  Structurally the movie is a hodgepodge of reminiscences, conversations, archival footage and feverish re-enactments of famous incidents at the hotel. By far the most attention is given to the unsolved fatal stabbing in October 1978 of Nancy Spungen, who was staying there with Sid Vicious. Bijou Phillips and Jamie Burke play the happy couple who are visited in a re-enacted scene by two drug dealers.  In this disorderly documentary about disorderly lives, outrageousness trumps art. When the camera scans the paintings on the lobby walls, none are credited. Nor does the documentary bother mentioning the scores of great artists from Mark Twain to Bob Dylan who have spent time at the hotel.  Desperate to stir up drama, it brings in recollections of 9/11 accompanied by images of the smoldering twin towers. One employee recalls attending orgies with 60 people. Another man recounts the details of his brain hemorrhage while pumping iron. People relate personal ghost stories.  The hotel’s biggest celebrity fan is Ethan Hawke, who gratefully recalls that Mr. Bard gave him a room when his marriage was breaking up. Eight years ago, Mr. Hawke, who does a decent imitation of Mr. Bard’s New York accent, filmed a fictional homage to the hotel, “Chelsea Walls.” It is marginally better than this one.

Maverick helmer Abel Ferrara, best known for his tales of Gotham's concrete-scraped underbelly ("Bad Lieutenant," "King of New York"), salutes a Manhattan landmark in docu "Chelsea on the Rocks." A skittery, rambling but often absorbing portrait of the Chelsea Hotel, pic shuffles together vintage archive footage, scrappy dramatic re-enactments of famous moments at the hotel, and original interview material in helmer's first go at docmaking in more than 30 years. Projection in Ferrara's hometown is a cinch, while flitting presence of various famous names should ensure fest bookings and maybe a limited run theatrically before ancillary afterlife.
 Built in 1883 and serving as a hotel and residential building since 1905, the Chelsea Hotel on West 23rd Street has long been synonymous with the bohemian scene, offering a temporary and permanent home for a host of famous, infamous and vaguely known artists, musicians, filmmakers and other hipster types, from Warhol Factory-thesp Paul America to the late '50s artist Michele Zalopany. Residents Dylan Thomas, Thomas Wolfe, Janis Joplin, William Burroughs, the Grateful Dead and Quentin Crisp are just some of the figures mentioned or seen in archival clips.
There have been scores more big names pic doesn't mention, but "Chelsea on the Rocks" never attempts to set itself up as a sober history (perhaps an oxymoronic concept, given the Chelsea's rep for hedonism). Instead, Ferrara intersperses his archive material with interviews of current and recent residents, including thesps Ethan Hawke and Dennis Hopper, helmer Milos Forman and cartoonist R. Crumb, who tell stories of fires they survived, overdoses they lived next door to, and wild parties they attended.
All pay tribute to Stanley Bard, also interviewed here, who owned and managed the hotel for years, and whose laidback attitude toward credit and rent collection created a haven for so many financially unstable residents. The impetus to make the docu stems from the fact that Bard, for reasons never fully explained, has lost control of the hotel to property developers who hope to turn it into Gotham's answer to Hollywood's Chateau Marmont for the rich elite.
According to his credits, Ferrara has made only one other docu in three decades of steady filmmaking, the little seen short "Not Guilty: For Keith Richards" (1977), and, based on evidence here, Ferrara is no great shakes as an interviewer. He constantly interrupts, wanders waywardly into a shot at one point, and shows no interest in making life easier for the aud by, say, putting up subtitles that would identify the interviewees, some of whom are hardly well-known faces.
Worse still, the clumsy, HD-shot dramatized scenes -- of Sid Vicious' g.f. Nancy Spungen (played by Bijou Philips) being stabbed and of someone who seems to rep Janice Joplin (Shanyn Leigh) partying -- lessen the pic's impact.
However, almost despite Ferrara's efforts, pic can't fail to charm at moments, featuring as it does grainy clips of the Grateful Dead jamming with the real Joplin and Hawke drolly impersonating Bard telling a story about Arthur Miller and Marilyn Monroe.
Camera (color, HD, 16mm, video-to-35mm), Ken Kelsch; editor, Langdon Page; music, G.E. Smith, Tony Garnier; costume designer, Nile Cmylo; sound (Dolby Digital), Thomas Myers; sound designer, Tom Paul. Reviewed at Cannes Film Festival (Special Screenings), May 23, 2008. Running time: 89 MIN.
 


One New York institution (Abel Ferrara , b. 1951, the Bronx ) regards another (The Hotel Chelsea , b. 1883, West 23rd Street) in Chelsea on the Rocks .
The nominal topic here is the end of an era at this red-brick Queen Anne Historical Place, where a timeline of America's greatest artists have puked in the toilets. Most of Ferrara's material dates from 2007, during the ousting of long-reigning manager David Bard , a famously sympathetic landlord to infamously cash-strapped artists, who cultivated the hotel's reputation as a haven for the insolvent-but-creative. One interviewee remembers Harry Smith  getting $30,000 behind in rent. "Supposedly, they wanna make it like the Chateau Marmont ," says another, the eviction of long-term tenants looming.
Chelsea on the Rocks  is Ferrara's first feature documentary (forthcoming are projects on Little Italy's Mulberry Street and a women's prison in Naples , Italy). He conducts the interviews—introduced with no on-screen nametags—and interjects profanities in a rasp that sounds like he has been smoking thermal insulation. This is also the first Ferrara film that doesn't congeal: Contrasting the mostly middle-aged tenants/talking heads are flashes of youthful Dionysians and re-enactments of legendary celebrity dissipation on the Chelsea's premises, including the death of Sid's Nancy Spungen  (Bijou Phillips , looking and sounding considerably better than the real thing) and Janis Joplin 's near-collapse (also resurrected in stock footage, sitting in with the Grateful Dead ). And how to justify the abrupt interjection of 9/11 and the disconcerting musical contributions from Ferrara and Ethan Hawke ? Usually, the weaving eloquence of Ferrara's filmmaking suffices to draw one in. Chelsea  rambles—and in a way that makes you want to move down the bar.
The director of Bad Lieutenant  has always been a study in contradiction. He is cultivator of his own wily-wino folk legend. When I worked at Kim's Video, the phone number on his account went to a liquor store. In one interview, he claimed to forget having made the movie Fear City . And yet he has kept up a pace of filmmaking, over three decades, that the strictest teetotaling professional would envy.
I remember Ferrara introducing his film Mary , one of three very-good-to-great movies he made this decade, all barely screened in the U.S. He brought up a hack New York Times  reviewer's dismissal of a confessional scene as "embarrassing." "Embarrassing? He's on his knees, begging God. What's he supposed to be? Cool?" Ferrara is never afraid to risk ridiculousness, essential when dealing in religious abjection and intoxication. And for someone who takes his artistic gambles, it's only surprising he hasn't rolled snake eyes more.
