City of Men
 is a followup to City of God
, Fernando Meirelles' much praised and multi-awarded Brazilian film from 2002 about gangster life and the cycle of poverty in the slums of Rio de Janeiro. Or more precisely, it's a followup to the popular Brazilian television series City of Men
, which was a well-reviewed outgrowth of the original film. This new film continues to explore the vicious circle of poverty and thug life, and carries over two of the main characters from the TV series. Its portrait of fatherless boys perpetuating the always embattled gangster lifestyle in which gang identity outweighs all other emotional attachments is eye-opening and oftentimes quite graphic in its depiction of the violence that permeates their lives. Yet Morelli's City of Men
 has little of the narrative flair and editing zip that made Meirelles' City of God
 such compelling viewing. The plot here is revealed more conventionally, and is marred by both a trumped-up crisis that divides the story's two leads and an ending that's longer on wish fulfillment than reality. Ace (Silva) and Wallace (Cunha) play the movie's two lifelong friends who are approaching the age of 18. Both teens, now on the verge of legal manhood, have grown up fatherless. Furthermore, Ace is also the father of a toddler, whom he alternately regards as a nuisance and a delight. Wallace, who was abandoned by his father before he was born, wants to find the man so he can add his dad's name to his birth certificate and not be labeled an official bastard for the rest of his life. As rough as their lives are, Ace and Wallace have no direct involvement in the gangs that rule the neighborhood and are trying to cut a new path out of the slums. Both actors are good and Morelli captures a good sense of the limitations of their situation. But the film sometimes loses its thematic way and gets bogged down in the details of its forced dramatic twists. City of Men
 is an intriguing but incompletely developed heir to the far superior City of God
.


The makers of "City of Men" have described their new friendship drama as a companion piece to Fernando Meirelles's "City of God." That movie won international acclaim by rubbing our faces in all kinds of underage seediness and violent crime. It was authentic. It was also nauseatingly slick. "City of Men," which Meirelles produced and features a few of the actors from "City of God," doesn't stand a chance at that kind of worldwide popularity.
For one thing, the despicable sensationalism that won "God" such a huge audience is gone. So is the movie's panoramic vision of Rio's grisly, emotionally and economically impoverished underworld. Where "City of God" was ferocious, grandiose, and glamorous, this movie - directed by Paulo Morelli and written by Elena Soarez - is modest and intimate, acoustic where the other was desperate to electrify.
But watching best friends Ace (Douglas Silva) and Wallace (Darlan Cunha) wend their way through Rio's lawless streets, it's the wall-to-wall electricity of Meirelles's moviemaking, unclean as it was, that you miss. Maybe heartfelt discretion isn't the way to go, either.
"City of Men" dredges up a new tale of gangstas and their turf war in the Dead-End Hill favela. But we've been through the mood changes and backstabbing before - in Brazil and beyond it. So what the movie centers on is the bond between Ace and Wallace, who are on the edge of 18. They've been buddies since they were boys, and the movie has the footage to prove it. Silva and Cunha were urchins in "City of God." Now Ace, with his baby face and shiny mahogany skin, is a daddy. And Wallace, with his serious eyes and big smile, is searching for his jailbird father.
Morelli and Soarez don't have the smoothest time lacing the escalating gang war with the escalating melodrama between Ace and Wallace. When those two end up on opposite sides of this mess, all you can do is wait for the storm to blow over and hope the body count isn't too staggering (it's not). The movie has a dramatic thinness, breezy tone, and unconvincing happy-ish ending that make it feel more inconsequential than anything about killers and imperiled children probably should. But no one ever really looks all that worried in the first place. The most harrowing scene in "City of Men" involves a woman having her dreadlocks cruelly shorn.
One exception to the lightness is Rodrigo Dos Santos, who plays Wallace's father, and he is as elegant as some of the camerawork and editing. There's real sadness in his face and voice. The movie is mongering hope. But he comes close to embodying what happens when hope's not enough.

City of Men  has the electrically over¬saturated style of reality that made City of God  such a searing vision of teenage criminal life in the slums of Rio de Janeiro. But this companion piece, produced though not directed by Fernando Meirelles, is as heavy with message as any Hollywood delinquent drama of the late '50s. It centers on a pair of boy¬hood pals, each haunted by his absent father, who get drawn into a gang war. Douglas Silva and Darlan Cunha make their torn camaraderie touching, but we can sense the Big Revelation About Their Past half a mile away.


 The most disquieting moment in “City of Men,” a rootin’-tootin’ gangster movie shot in the notoriously lawless shantytowns overlooking the beaches of Rio de Janeiro, is also the most subdued. Acerola, a k a Ace (Douglas Silva), an 18-year-old still carrying baby fat, admits that he is frightened and unprepared to care for his infant son as his wife, Cris (Camila Monteiro), leaves to find work in São Paulo. Although Ace loves his little boy, he is only a child in a man’s body himself, and he begs her not to go. For him to assume full parental responsibility is almost unimaginable.  In “City of Men,” directed by Paulo Morelli, Ace’s reluctance is more the rule than the exception. In the strutting, drug- and gun-infested culture of the favelas, young men who sire children aren’t expected to acknowledge them, and their tough, sullen wives and girlfriends have little choice but to tolerate the situation or leave. That’s just the way it is in a hyper-macho environment with virulent homophobia.  Underneath their swagger, these teenage gangsters brood about the absence of their own fathers. Ace’s best friend, Laranjinha, a k a Wallace (Darlan Cunha), who is days short of turning 18, is especially obsessed with his own paternity. As he approaches the numerical demarcation between child and adult, when he will need an identification card stating his last name, he embarks on a concerted search for his father based on neighborhood rumor.  Mr. Morelli’s film is a companion piece (not strictly a sequel) to “City of God,” the 2002 global hit directed by his longtime collaborator Fernando Meirelles that featured some of the same actors, including Mr. Silva and Mr. Cunha playing 11-year-olds. The new movie, written by Elena Soárez, is spun off from a successful Brazilian television series of the same title that was shown on the Sundance Channel and is available on DVD. (Mr. Meirelles was a creator of the television series and is a producer of the new film.)  “City of Men” has a more humane, you might say bleeding-heart, perspective on this anarchic culture than “City of God.” The first movie offered a startling, documentarylike picture of social decay in which the steady influx of drugs and guns over several generations transformed depressed neighborhoods into war zones. As the weaponry grew more deadly, the age of the warriors fell, and in the movie’s later scenes, the opposing forces were child armies mowing one another down with lethal toys.  Where “City of God” had the hard-boiled attitude of an exposé filmed on site with hand-held cameras and rapid jump cuts, “City of Men” is a more conventionally structured melodrama. The nihilism of the first movie has been softened enough to suggest that this culture of violence may not be quite so extreme as the earlier movie portrayed. Amid the organized sociopathy in which allegiances are continually shifting, and people are literally shooting one another in the back, true friendships are perilous but not hopeless undertakings.  The movie’s all-out warfare begins when Nefasto (Eduardo B R Piranha), a henchman of the charismatic boss of bosses, Madrugadão, a k a Midnight (Jonathan Haagensen), betrays him and with a new posse occupies his turf on Dead End Hill. Midnight mounts an even larger and deadlier response. Like those in “City of God,” the battle scenes show herds of armed juvenile soldiers swarming like locusts down the steep, terraced hills. As the war spreads, Ace and Wallace accidentally find themselves on opposite sides.  Wallace eventually finds his father, Heraldo (Rodrigo Dos  Santos), who served 15 years of a 20-year sentence for murder. The wariness of the father when confronted with the neediness of the son indicates that it is far too late for their bond to become more than superficial. Though probably only in his mid-30s, Heraldo exudes an air of defeat. The thrill of youthful armed combat has faded into fatigue and desperation. Twenty years hence, Wallace, if he survives, will probably be just like him.  That the sins of the fathers are passed on to the sons is the somewhat thudding message of a movie that hammers home its point by having Ace and Wallace reach an impasse in their friendship that parallels the relationship of their fathers two decades earlier. In a society of fatherless boys craving role models, glamorous outlaws fill the void.  “City of Men” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has strong language and scenes of violence but  is not gory.

The superheated, rat-a-tat-tat style of Fernando Meirelles' epic "City of God" (2002) gives way to a lighter but also more emotionally satisfying take on the lives of favela gangstas in companion piece "City of Men," helmed by longtime Meirelles collaborator Paulo Morelli. Despite its sudsy storyline, this second tour through the punk-infested Rio slums could attract more mature arthouse auds, drawn by character rather than the minutiae of guns 'n' drugs, though it's unlikely to match "God's" muscular $7.5 million U.S. take. Miramax plans a limited Stateside release in January.
Apart from its setting, "Men" has no plot connections with the 2002 movie, despite the fact that lead actors Douglas Silva and Darlan Cunha both had roles in the former pic. Instead, it's based on characters and some storylines developed in an intermediary TV series of the same name, and uses largely the same cast. Series ran four seasons (totaling 19 episodes) on Brazil's TV Globo from 2002-05, attracting 35 million viewers, and was issued Stateside on DVD in fall 2006.
Hub of the movie is the friendship between two favela kids -- Acerola (Silva), dubbed "Ace" in the subtitles, and Laranjinha (Cunha), aka "Wallace." Ace is 18, married to the long-suffering Cris (Camila Monteiro), and has a baby son, Clayton; Wallace is about to turn 18 and still lives with his mother.
Both guys never knew their fathers. Ace's was gunned down when he was still a tot, and he's now confronted with the responsibilities of fatherhood himself at a young age. However, Wallace is suddenly keen to track down his dad, partly because he needs his signature to secure an ID card.The way in which the two buddies hunt down Wallace's dad is handled as breezily as the issue of Ace's family burdens. Duo manage to identify their man with convenient rapidity and, when he's confronted in the street by Wallace, Heraldo (Rodrigo dos Santos) simply fesses up and tells him to get lost.
Imprisoned 15 years ago for robbery and manslaughter, Heraldo has skipped parole and is now living low. When he finally agrees to give Wallace face time, the bond between the two is beautifully developed and gradually becomes the pic's emotional center, with Heraldo clearly seeing in the kid a younger version of himself. Strength of this bond helps make plausible the drama that erupts between Wallace and Ace when a rather-too-neat plot twist later rears its head.
Cunha, whose beatific face is nicely at odds with his troubled background, grabs most of the acting honors and, of the two leads, has the more empathetic role. Ace's character arc is more fuzzy, centering on his desire to broaden the sexual horizons cut short by his early marriage to Cris, who has gone to Sao Paulo to earn money.
Running parallel to the lead stories, and finally intertwining with them, is a gang war that develops between local tough guy Madrugadao (Jonathan Haagensen) and his onetime lieutenant, Nefasto (Eduardo BR). But even when the guns break out at the halfway point, and rival gangs stalk each other through unlit alleyways, pic (thankfully) never develops the musicvid style of "City of God" in its approach to violence.
Here, the gunplay is almost offhand, and characters don't get lost amid the bullets. Less happily, there's little real sense of threat about the bad guys, compared with their counterparts in "God," diminishing what should be a life-or-death drama.
Especially in the opening reels, Adriano Goldman's handheld lensing oozes the sweltering heat of the hillside favelas, always positioning them geographically in relation to Rio as a whole. Editing by Daniel Rezende ("God") is restless but not exhaustingly so, and music by Antonio Pinto (also from "God") an effective mixture of musique concrete
 and the more conventional.
Excerpts from the TV series --processed in gaudy color -- are liberally scattered throughout as flashbacks.
Camera (color), Adriano Goldman; editor, Daniel Rezende; music, Antonio Pinto; art director, Rafael Ronconi; costume designer, Ines Salgado; sound (Dolby Digital), Paulo Ricardo Nunes, Alessandro Laroca, Armando Torres Jr.; associate producer, Guel Arraes; assistant director, Isabella Teixeira. Reviewed at London Film Festival, Oct. 25, 2007. (Also in American Film Market.) Running time: 105 MIN.
 



City of God , Fernando Meirelles 's 2002 film about Rio shantytowns, was spun off into a hit TV series (something like the Brazilian equivalent of The Wire ) featuring two of the movie's youngest stars, favela-bred Douglas Silva  and Darlan Cunha . Now the boys are grown, and the series is being re–spun off into another film. Their characters, Ace (Silva) and Wallace (Cunha), are best friends who grew up together in the shadow of Pool Hall Hill, where Wallace's drug-dealer cousin reigns supreme. This is an all-male world—presumably because the town's women are off not being stupid, not getting themselves killed, and not abandoning their kids—and themes of fatherhood and brotherhood are particularly resonant. Neither Ace nor Wallace knew their fathers growing up, and after a misguided quest to discover their roots and avenge the past, they turn to each other and the future, recognizing that they are each other's best chance to escape the entrancing violence of gang warfare, rendered here with an entrancing rhythm and logic of its own. Paulo Morelli  directs capably, with a heavy dash of MTV -generation flair: hyper-saturated colors, close-ups of skin glittering with sweat, and a constant patter of gunfire that undergirds the soundtrack like a steady heartbeat.
