What could possibly have possessed Stephen Chow, the mad scientist of slapstick chopsocky who made Kung Fu Hustle  (2004), to follow up that psychedelic pinwheel of a movie by entangling himself in CJ7 , the gooey tale of a poor little Hong Kong schoolboy who befriends a fur ball from outer space? The cuddlebug in question may bear an abstract resemblance to E.T. (Chow's stated inspiration), but he's really closer to Gizmo in Gremlins  crossed with a Chicken Little who got washed through the rinse cycle. His ''mischief'' is trivial and charmless, and so is the movie.

 A devilishly entertaining curveball thrown at unsuspecting family audiences, “CJ7” is “E.T.” as reimagined by the premier clown of Chinese cinema, Stephen Chow. Whether American viewers will respond with the enthusiasm of their Chinese counterparts remains to be seen. What is clear, however, is that Mr. Chow’s notion of family is decidedly more Addams than Brady.  A simple fairy tale — albeit with a perverseness that no Disney executive would permit —  “CJ7” finds Mr. Chow in a Chaplinesque mood as Ti, an impoverished widower caring for his young son, Dicky (the  9-year-old actress Xu Jiao in her debut). By day Ti works long hours on a construction site to pay for Dicky’s elite private school; at night they return to a sweltering, cockroach-infested shack  with unreliable electricity. Both suffer constant bullying: Ti’s overbearing boss (Lam Tze Chung) berates him for having ideas above his station, while Dicky’s fastidious teacher (Lee Sheung Ching) and snotty schoolmates treat him like a leper.  Scouring the local dump one evening to supplement his son’s wardrobe, Ti discovers a strange green ball that, when placed in Dicky’s curious hands, transforms into a saucer-eyed creature resembling an ineptly groomed cockapoo. Emitting bleep-bloop noises from a waggling antenna, it reveals to Dicky its alien origins and magical powers. In a hilariously inventive sequence, the boy envisions using his new friend to dole out a little cosmic justice to his schoolyard tormentors. The violence is as exaggerated — and reversible — as vintage Hanna-Barbera, but the C.G.I. delivery is state of the art.  Filmed in the seaport town of Ningbo in Zhejiang Province, “CJ7” (the title is a reference to the Chinese space program) has an airy widescreen look that counters the privations of Ti and Dicky’s surroundings. Ceding the limelight to his tiny co-star — who dances in it like a pro — and reining in his everything-but-the-kitchen-sink instincts, a subdued Mr. Chow devotes his considerable creative energy to small, unexpected scenes that showcase his bizarre sense of humor. As father and son bond over a wall of scurrying roaches or Ti stumblingly hits on the gorgeous Miss Yuen (Kitty Zhang), our pleasure derives as much from the moment’s unexpectedness as from the deftness of its execution.  Unlike his previous feature, the deliriously cracked “Kung Fu Hustle” — enjoyed by many under-age fans who slipped beneath the inconvenient R rating —  “CJ7” has a brake pedal, and Mr. Chow uses it. (At one point he hits it so decisively, and so unpredictably, that the action will make you gasp.) And though the subtitles  — and some Eastern child-rearing norms — may dismay, they shouldn’t pose a problem for the average middle-schooler. Above all the movie has a heart, a mind and a gentleness of spirit that parents will welcome, while the frequent flights of fancy ensure that no child will be left behind.  “CJ7” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Children and toys are squished, pummeled and otherwise humiliated.

Heavy on CGI slapstick and light on meaningful emotional content, "CJ7" is a spotty first foray into family-friendly entertainment by Hong Kong multihyphenate Stephen Chow. "E.T."-inspired comic fantasy about a poor boy adopting a cute alien catches the eye but not fully the heart with itsundernourished father-son dynamics, critter hijinks and smattering of social commentary. Chow's name has helped pic to an anticipated B.O. bonanza in China since Jan. 31 release, but his first movie since 2004's "Kung Fu Hustle" faces a much stiffer test outside Asia. Limited Stateside rollout is set for March 7.
In an attempt to create the Chinese equivalent of a franchiseable Hollywood family blockbuster, Chow's fifth helming effort has none of his nonsensical verbal humor and far fewer cartoonishly violent f/x setpieces. The star's huge Asian fan base should roll more readily with these changes, but Western admirers looking for another "Shaolin Soccer" or "Kung Fu Hustle" won't find it in this second venture between Chow's the Star Overseas shingle and Sony's Columbia Asia production arm.
Chow (who wrote the film with his usual army of co-scripters) plays it mostly straight as Ti, an impoverished-but-honest widower ploughing everything he earns into a posh elementary school education for young son Dicky (adorable discovery Xu Jiao, actually a girl).
In forced swipes at the gap between rich and poor, the raggedy Dicky is publicly derided by snooty teacher Mr. Cao (Lee Sheung-ching) and bullied by his classmates. Standing apart is Miss Yuen (newcomer Kitty Zhang), a teacher whose angelic kindness immediately tags her as Ti's love interest-in-waiting.
Dicky incongruously throws a tantrum when dad won't buy him a "CJ1," the hot new robot-dog toy. But Ti's substitute gift, found on a rubbish dump, turns out to be much better: a strange green orb that transforms into a cute little barking creature whose goo-goo eyes rival Puss in Boots from the "Shrek" sequels.
Left behind by a spaceship, the newcomer has magical powers to offer its host. In a fun series of f/x sequences, Dicky is able to suddenly swim like a speedboat, bend soccer balls better than Beckham and so forth. All this, however, turns out to be a dream sequence, and things turn out very differently when the same day is replayed for real.
As amusing as these shenanigans are, pic doesn't pack much emotional punch in the second half, when dad discovers the space woofer and Dicky temporarily becomes a brat with his new-found powers. There's no lone playground pal to give the boy reality checks that younger viewers would connect with, and the life-lessons dialogue between father and son lacks variation and bite.
Xu, 9, is completely believable as a boy and carries the day with a cheeky charm and a delightful way with the CGI pet that's guaranteed to melt some viewers' hearts on occasion. Chow doesn't seem as relaxed as usual, and Zhang is short-changed with only a few perfunctory scenes. Other players do OK in primarily caricature roles.
Slickly filming in widescreen in Chow's ancestral home -- the port city of Ningbo, just south of Shanghai -- Hong Kong lenser Poon Hang-seng emphasizes rich primary colors and even makes the garbage look nice. CGI work is fine, with the titular critter stretched, flattened and otherwise convincingly manipulated. In Cantonese version caught, dubbing of the Mandarin-mouthing Mainland members of the cast (who include Xu and Zhang) is variable.
The "CJ" in the English title refers to the Mandarin name for the Yangtze River ("Changjiang"), and is also a typical name attached to things like Chinese space probes.
