 Soldiers’ uniforms are supposed to blur identity and present individuals as cogs in an impersonal military machine. Look closely, however, and underneath the uniforms are people with attitudes. Rebels and cynics don’t adapt as well to enforced conformity as obedient apple polishers. And when the soldiers are young women, like Smadar (Smadar Sayar) and Mirit (Naama Schendar), spirited 18-year-old conscripts in the Israeli Army, whose routine is scrutinized  in the drama “Close to Home,” the rules change color. In countless small ways it’s different for girls.  The movie, written and directed by Vidi Bilu and Dalia Hager, is really a study of people coping with excruciating boredom and the absurd aspects of military life. Smadar and Mirit are assigned, as a team, to patrol  a sector of Jerusalem that includes the gates to the city. As Palestinian workers pour in each morning, the two women are charged with  checking their identification and filling out elaborate forms. It’s stressful work, made more so because they must exercise authority over mostly male strangers who are older, bigger and stronger.  The rules for patrolling the streets are stringent: no sitting down, no leaning on doors or walls, no cellphone calling, no eating, no smoking, no going into stores. As the days drag on, Smadar and Mirit violate them all.  The movie, much of which was shot with hand-held cameras on the streets of Jerusalem, adopts the tunnel vision of impatient, self-centered soldiers gritting their teeth as they fulfill their two-year military obligation. None of the women in the unit seem to have a greater sense of mission, and there is no talk of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or of politics in general.  Boys and boyfriends are the No. 1 topic, followed by the petty personality conflicts you would expect in a high school corridor. When a superior officer is spotted in the area, the soldiers warn one another by cellphone to be on the alert.  The process of stopping pedestrians and bus riders is portrayed as uncomfortable for both sides. If you’ve ever stifled a bubble of rage while going through airport security, you will recognize the tensions that Smadar and Mirit must face all day, every day. And many of their days are punctuated with explosive emotional confrontations.  One Palestinian woman at a checkpoint with her young son is ordered to throw her pita bread in the garbage because a sign says not to bring food into an inspection station. When she angrily refuses, voices are raised. A man stopped on the street bluntly refuses to give his identification, and his stubbornness escalates into a shouting match involving several other pedestrians.  Of the two soldiers Smadar is the rebel and shirker and Mirit the goody-goody whom Smadar pressures into misbehaving. At one point their mutual hostility drives Mirit to request reassignment. But eventually a bond of friendship develops.  Smadar, her eyes flashing with defiance and contempt for authority, has little tolerance for frustration. During her off hours she has instigated a game in which she and a boyfriend shoplift for sport. When he objects that she hasn’t played by their rules, she turns on him viciously.  Halfway into the film a bomb explodes during one of their patrols. Mirit, knocked to the ground but uninjured, is helped by a handsome stranger who then disappears. After they catch sight of him at another location, he becomes an object of both their fantasies.  If the shock of the bombing momentarily reminds Smadar and Mirit of what they’re doing and why, they quickly forget. Shopping, flirting, haircuts, girl talk: in this small, precisely observed film, it’s the little things that loom large.  What does this all mean for Israeli security? The movie doesn’t say directly, but it acknowledges that any security system is only as effective as the vigilance and dedication of those enforcing it.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

Two teenage girls on military duty in Jerusalem find friendship, men and going on the lam are just as important as policing the Arab community in "Close to Home." Highly accessible pic, which mixes humor, tragedy, tenderness and political acumen into a well-observed coming-of-age format, reps a very impressive feature bow by writer-directors Vidi Bilu and Dalia Hager. Pic has theatrical chances beyond festivals, plus should get plenty of mileage on Euro TV.
Film partly draws on the experiences of one of the distaff directors, who was assigned to police patrolling duty during her military service. But aside from script's mass of small details, the movie's special quality is that it deals with issues that arise from Israelis policing a divided city in a way that puts characters first and political grandstanding second.
Smadar (Smadar Sayar), 18, is first seen being watched by her superior, Dubek (Irit Suki), as she minutely goes through an Arab woman's possessions in a border inspection booth. Smadar is clearly as uncomfortable about the whole process, but the film soon signals it's not going to be a regular drama. When another girl refuses to do the job any longer, a girly mutiny takes place that's only quelled when Dubek cracks the whip.
Also uncomfortable about the whole job is Mirit (Naama Schendar), who tries to get her parents (Ami Weinberg, Katia Zimbris) to have her transferred. They refuse, and she ends up paired on street patrol with Smadar, checking the papers of any Palestinian passers-by they care to stop.
Relations between the two girls are initially frosty. Mirit, who squealed on a colleague during the mini-mutiny, is painfully over-conscientious, while Smadar couldn't care less about the job.
Film gets a lot of enjoyable mileage out of the whole teenage squad's solidarity (warning each other by cell phone when Dubek is coming), as well as their hopelessness at doing the job.
At the 40-minute mark, the real world intervenes as a bomb rocks the neighborhood, with tragic results. But instead of turning into a more politicized drama, pic holds to its course, turning the event into the start of the girls' long path to real friendship.
Pic's free-flowing, episodic manner, and refusal to vilify people automatically -- even Dubek is shown to have a soft side -- give it a very Central European flavor. But in its humorous and dramatic ups-and-downs, film is exceptionally well structured, on a par with its tech side.
Even down to supporting roles, there's hardly a weakly drawn character, and by movie's end there's a feeling of having gotten to know everyone involved. Sayar and Schendar show a natural chemistry together, and Suki, in perhaps the hardest role, manages to bring a discreet humor to Dubek that makes it pretty clear where the filmmakers stand on the situation depicted.
Yontan Bar Giora's music supplies occasionally lightness, lensing by Yaron Scharf is good-looking throughout, and Joelle Alexis' editing is trim.
 Camera (color, HD-to-35mm), Yaron Scharf; editor, Joelle Alexis; music, Yontan Bar Giora; production designer, Avi Fahima; costume designer, Li Alembik; sound (Dolby SR), Itai Elohev, Aviv Aldema; assistant director, Avi Satat. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Forum), Feb. 9, 2006. Running time: 98 MIN.
 


 
 


 

With at least the virtue of novelty on its side, Vidi Bilu and Dalia Hager 's debut outing as writer-directors tackles the claustrophobic world of Israeli women soldiers who work out their mandatory military service patrolling the streets and buses of Jerusalem , a job as tedious as it is dangerous. Nothing if not detailed, Close to Home  follows two conscripts still in their teens (one a born conformist, the other an instinctive rebel) as they write up Arab passersby, goof off for falafels, protect one another from scary female officers, and go home to Mom and Dad. Though it clearly means to call into question the legitimacy of their work, the movie is formlessly episodic as it meanders from one day to the next, finally losing itself in a forest of coming-of-age clichés.
