A sun-spangled Florida fishing village on the verge of corporate upsizing. A socio-collage of local color: cops, doctors, mechanics, party girls, crooks. A domestic love triangle in which the three people involved are so sensitive they're friends, and they stay friends. If you didn't know better, you might mistake Coastlines  for one of John Sayles' portraits of the America that big American movies don't show you. The writer-director, however, is Victor Nunez, the regional veteran of pre-Miramax independent film who had a career highlight in 1997 with Ulee's Gold , starring Peter Fonda's glorious haunted stare.
Nunez can craft a movie with a woodcarver's unshowy perfection. Displaying an empathy so fine-grained it flirts with Zen detachment, he leads us through the interlaced stories of Sonny (Timothy Olyphant), a sexy ne'er-do-well who returns home after three years in prison; his lifelong chum and opposite number, Dave (Josh Brolin, in a mustache that wipes out half of his already quiet personality), a deputy sheriff and devoted family man; and Dave's wife, Ann (Sarah Wynter), who is caught between the husband she loves for his dull stability and the impractical lure of Sonny's danger. Coastlines  is so meticulous, so full of polished ''symmetries,'' that it's a little flat. It's a heartfelt movie that could have used a zigzaggier undercurrent, though Olyphant, in the sort of role that Paul Newman used to swagger through, has a star's easy command.

Enough of the ingredients for a sultry downscale noir are in place in "Coastlines," that once the film turns perversely goody-good, it leaves you feeling vaguely disgruntled, as if after consuming a rich, greasy meal, you were handed a single sugarless mint for dessert. Written, directed, and edited by Victor Nunez, the movie is the third part of his trilogy  set in the least exploited part of the Sunshine State, the Florida Panhandle. This is the scrubby coastal territory where trailers meet the Gulf, where rednecks with guns pilot yachts, where the culture of auto repair shops rubs elbows with drug smuggling and shady tourist development. When the movie pauses to survey the sullen landscape, you can almost feel the humidity dripping off your brow. Like its two forerunners in the trilogy, "Ruby in Paradise," which pushed Ashley Judd toward Hollywood stardom, and "Ulee's Gold," which won Peter Fonda the best-actor award from the New York Film Critics Circle, "Coastlines" features detailed performances that offer unusually intimate glimpses into its characters' mood swings. But if the acting captures their emotional ebbs and flows, the screenplay has  discrepancies and lapses that can't be acted around. A larger problem is the film's attempt to piece together a hard-boiled crime drama with a soft-boiled soap opera, ultimately giving precedence to the suds and adding a sickly lemon scent. Sonny (Timothy Olyphant), an ex-con; Dave (Josh Brolin), the local sheriff who is his best friend; and Dave's restless wife, Ann (Sarah Wynter), a hospital nurse, form the uneasy triangle at the center of the movie. Sonny, unexpectedly discharged from prison after serving only three years of a longer term because of overcrowding, returns home itching with impatience. Having taken the rap for his part in an unspecified drug operation, he intends to get his hands on the $200,000 owed him by his partners in crime. During his three years away, those partners, Fred Vance (William Forsythe) and Fred's  nephew Eddie (Josh Lucas), have become wealthy regional powerbrokers, untouchable by local law enforcement. If anyone reins them in, it will have to be the feds (who so far have expressed no interest) or vigilante justice. As the glowering, trigger-happy Eddie, Mr. Lucas relishes his too-brief turn as a meanie with the temper of a riled copperhead. The Vances have a history of torching their enemies' houses. Once Sonny raises a little too much hell for comfort, they blow up the shack in which he is staying with his father (Scott Wilson), an oyster farmer, killing his dad and injuring Sonny, who moves in with Dave and his family. That's when the triangle heats up. Before long there is hot sex in the kitchen between Sonny and Ann when her husband and his two little girls are out of the house. Although Ann grows increasingly testy and cold to Dave, he has barely an inkling of the affair happening under his nose. Sonny eventually moves out and stays in the back of the auto repair shop of an old friend (Robert Wisdom) who gives him a job painting cars. Sooner or later, a day of reckoning between Sonny and the Vances is inevitable. That confrontation, which takes place on the water, comes and goes too hastily and leaves too few repercussions. Meanwhile, back in the boudoir,  the affair at the movie's center would make sense only if Ann, a devoted wife, responsible mother and capable professional, were not what she appears to be. So unless she and Sonny share some undisclosed romantic history, their striking up  a relationship at this point in their lives is  far-fetched. Until Sonny appears, there are no signs of serious marital discord. Even when Ann erupts with a speech about longing for the old crazy days, it isn't enough to explain her reckless, self-destructive behavior. For all his appeal as a sizzling one-night stand, Sonny is the kind of  loser no sane person (especially a comfortably married mother of two) would invest in emotionally. It all reaches a resolution that is  as synthetic as the sweetness in that sugarless mint passed off as dessert. Instead of chocolate, you're left with the metallic taste of saccharine. The movie is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations, profanity and violence.

Sometimes it's best to leave those old scripts in the trunk, a view borne out by "Coastlines," a melodramatic step backward for writer-director Victor Nunez after his last two pictures, the first-rate "Ruby in Paradise" and "Ulee's Gold." Nunez wrote the present script right after making his problematic 1984 thriller "A Flash of Green," and he's become a considerably better, more subtle dramatist in the interim. Flecked by some typically naturalistic grace notes, new pic is nevertheless submerged much of the time in the mechanics of an uninspiring menage a trois and some one-dimensional villainy. Without strong reviews or the sort of scintillating lead performance that anchored his most recent films, commercial seas will be choppy for this respectable but disappointing effort.
Title makes reference to Florida's so-called forgotten coast, the setting of both "Ruby" and "Ulee," the Gulf of Mexico Panhandle area long deemed a sleepy backwater but recently showing signs of burgeoning commercial development. "Those country days are going fast around here," local "entrepreneur" Fred Vance (William Forsythe) informs Sonny (Timothy Olyphant) upon the latter's release from prison. Sonny took the fall for Fred and his jumpy nephew Eddie (Josh Lucas) in a drug bust, and now Sonny just wants to collect the $200,000 the Vances owe him and quietly get on with his life.
Unsurprisingly, the Vances claim they don't have that much cash sitting around just now, and when Sonny presses his case, the bad ol' boys blow up Sonny's house, killing his old oyster-man dad (Scott Wilson). With nowhere to go, Sonny puts up with Dave (Josh Brolin) and Ann (Sarah Wynter), his best friends from the old days. Hunky policeman Dave knows the Vances are criminals but hasn't been able to pin anything on them, while the attractive Ann seems to have adapted to life as a professional nurse and responsible mother of two daughters. All the same, Dave appears to bore Ann, and Sonny's presence serves as a constant reminder of how much she loved her former "crazy" life.
Unfortunately, the inevitability of Sonny and Ann's illicit affair proves much more resistible to the viewer than it does to the participants. For starters, Nunez never makes it clear whether the two had been lovers previously; presumably, the sexual charge that drives them now must have existed before, and it would be useful to know if they acted upon it in their youth or are only now giving into it. Worse, however, is the fact that the liaison makes no sense from Ann's point of view; if Dave's a bit dull, Sonny is a true loser, with few redeeming qualities and no prospects. Even if momentarily blinded by lust, Ann would have to be deaf and dumb and somehow imagine that attaching her fate to Sonny's could lead her anywhere but down.
Despite the dramatic depth charges repped by the affair and the Sonny-Vance antagonism, which seems sure to produce more violence, "Coastlines," unlike "Ruby" and especially "Ulee," produces no undertow or gathering force. To the contrary, the midsection really drifts, as Sonny takes a job at a nearby garage run by a friend (Robert Wisdom, excellent) and avoids the too-available Effie (Angela Bettis) as his sessions with Ann become more frequent. At the same time, the police drag their heels where the Vances are concerned, leaving it to Sonny and the bad guys to try to settle their differences themselves in an unlikely, although not unoriginal, nautical showdown.
The script's bare narrative bones make this sound like nothing more than old B movie or telefilm fare; fortunately, Nunez is able to elevate the proceedings somewhat through his feel for the region and its people, and via accrued detail. There is a strong sense of everyone onscreen having known each other, their secrets and foibles included, forever, and of life in these parts resisting major change despite the onrush of development. The organic feel of Nunez at his best is still present in spots, but the filmmaker's deliberate, patient style often lapses into lethargy here.
Nor can the leading players make their characters seem anything more than ordinary. To make Sonny somehow worth the risk for Ann, Olyphant would have needed to supply him with an alluring spark or dangerous streak that simply isn't present; as it is, his performance sort of floats along just like the character. Similarly, Wynter is OK but doesn't elaborate on the text's suggestion of the dissatisfaction gnawing away inside that drives her into Sonny's arms. Brolin is credible as the straight-arrow cop who can be no more or less than what he is. Some of the supporting actors, including Wisdom as the big-hearted garage owner, Wilson as Sonny's doomed father and von Bargen as the police chief who's been on the job too long, make the most of their brief opportunities, and Forsythe embraces his stock friendly/threatening dialogue with a richly entertaining sandpaper growl.
Tech aspects are standard.

No one can seem to think ill of regional humanist Victor Nuñez  (Ruby in Paradise , Ulee's Gold ), but this low-budget Florida old-schooler is generally half the storytelling powerhouse he is claimed to be and twice the amateurish cliché-monger. This, his latest film, sat undistributed for four years, despite a cast (Josh Brolin , Timothy Olyphant , Josh Lucas , Scott Wilson , William Forsythe ) that should have paid its way to a shelf at Blockbuster . Virtually everything about Coastlines , from its title to the scenario that tracks a laconic good old boy (Olyphant) as he returns from prison to his Gulf Coast swamp town and its still-tempting criminal backside, telegraphs the hand of an idea-free newbie, not three decades' experience crafting "personal" cinema. Brolin and Sarah Wynter , as the married woman swayed by the new boy in town, find a few genuine moments over a kitchen table, but Nuñez's script is a limping, obvious bore. For some fans, the taste of on-location color matters most, but Nuñez's idea of the characters' ordinariness translates to flavorlessness, and he lights and shoots his scenes with a high schooler's care, often not even bothering to match up sight lines. Merely going to Sopchoppy, Florida, with actors is not quite enough.
