
Any movie that asks Lucy Liu to call Cedric the Entertainer her "boo" ought to be better than "Code Name: The Cleaner" -- or worse. But it's another standard-issue bad star-vehicle action-comedy, this time for Cedric.
He plays a janitor named Jake, which is not a name Cedric appears to know how to play. The janitor thinks he's a spy -- "James Bond on Red Bull," he says (oh, if only). He has no memory of anything, but he woke up next to a dead FBI agent, is apparently married to Nicollette Sheridan , and Lucy Liu (a waitress until, suddenly, she's not) is his mistress -- make that boo.
So it's "Memento" for dummies. But to this movie's credit, I couldn't follow it, either. Gradually, Jake realizes he's a major player in a weapon-of-mass-destruction conspiracy involving a video-game chip. Nobody is who they appear to be, not even Cedric, who's blander than ever.
"The Cleaner" is a title that easily applies to what his rising Hollywood star has done for the "Entertainer" part of Cedric's nom de fame: he practically squeaks. There was probably a moment before he was doing goose voices with Oprah in "Charlotte's Web," before he was hosting the Black Movie Awards , when Cedric would have needed a movie like "Code Name: The Cleaner." He would have torn up the dumb sex jokes and lame race gags. This is the movie of a man in his lean years, the early ones.
Tummy and all, Cedric is no longer lean. Now he looks as indifferent to being here as Liu and Sheridan do, and when Nicollette Sheridan can't be bothered to have fun in a bra and panties, something's extremely wrong. Will Patton , as a software executive, is unkempt and hammy, but what's new about that? And straight-to-cable action veteran Mark Dacascos does get in a few high kicks, as the corporate villain.
You can tell who needs "The Cleaner" by how loud in it they are. Niecy Nash , one of the cops from the Comedy Central improv show "Reno 911!," could rouse the dead. She has a small part as a building attendant with the hots for Cedric. He can't remember loving her up at a Christmas party. Now she requires a date, and a classy one: "I don't want no damn nine-piece!"
DeRay Davis steals a few scenes as a motor-mouthed janitor with hip-hop aspirations. He bets he could out-street-cred Tupac and 50 Cent were he to rap in a coma. You probably have to hear his hyped-up delivery to find it as funny as it is. But he and Nash give this movie that sweet keepin'-it-real desperation it needs. Neither of them is well-off or famous enough to waste the opportunity, hence they all but shout, "This is a stick up!" in their scenes. Still, they have got to start robbing better junk than this.


         Imagine "The Bourne Identity" but starring Cedric the Entertainer.
 
  The gag in "Code Name: The Cleaner" is that hapless Jake (the aforementioned Cedric the Entertainer) wakes up in a hotel room next to a dead FBI agent and a briefcase full of cash, but with amnesia. He must figure out what happened, where a highly sought-after computer chip is, and if he's a secret agent, a janitor or both. And he must do it before he runs out of one-liners and absurd predicaments. Throw in femme fatale 
Diane (Nicollette Sheridan) and good girl Gina (Lucy Liu), some gunfire and cleaning products, and you've got a tidy little entertainment.
 


         






    It's not spotless. The direction by Les Mayfield (of — brace yourself — "Encino Man") is ordinary, with the usual "see how funny this is" overuse of score. The script, credited to Robert Adetuyi ("Stomp the Yard," which opens Jan. 12) and George Gallo ("Midnight Run"), is repetitious, and the plot doesn't make a lick of sense. And for those who care about such things, the Vancouver-for-Seattle production brims with blatant brand placements.
 
  "The Cleaner" does have its pleasures, though, such as a surprising old-lady-spanking scene and a clog-dancing "battle." The ever-foxy Liu and the amusingly addled Entertainer make a solid comic team. Most of the memorable lines are a shade spicy for a family newspaper, one of which comes after Diane tells the incredulous Jake that they're married, he leans in to kiss her and she hits him.
 
  The movie is all but stolen by a couple of supporting players: DeRay Davis as Jake's custodial colleague Ronnie and Niecy Nash ("Reno 911!") as lusty security guard Jacuzzi ("It's French," she sniffs). The intense Ronnie delivers raps so fantastically awful they're unintentionally avant-garde: They don't rhyme or follow any recognizable rhythmic pattern. And they're about the hard-knock life of a janitor. Ronnie's bathroom confrontation with a villain is one of the biggest laughs in the movie.
 
  "Code Name: The Cleaner" offers no surprises but is good-natured and funny. It's mercifully devoid of car chases, although it does have a truly inane gunfight — did any of these trained killers ever hear of target practice? — and some out-of-left-field martial arts.
 
  Anyway, it's always fun to see Liu beat on some bad guys. Check your disbelief at the door and you'll get just what you expect.
 
  "Code Name: The Cleaner." MPAA rating: PG-13 for sexual content, crude humor and some violence. Running time: 1 hour, 31 minutes. In general release.   

 Those who take descriptive nouns as surnames tacitly subscribe to a recertification process of sorts. Vlad the Impaler was presumably expected to impale someone now and then. Bob the Builder would be demoted to mere Bob if he didn’t occasionally build something.  This should concern Cedric the Entertainer, whose artless performance deadens what could have been a much funnier comedy, “Code Name: The Cleaner.” He hams his way through the title role so clumsily that some game supporting performances — most notably by Lucy Liu and Nicollette Sheridan as two delicious pieces of arm candy — are wasted.  C. the E. — darn it, what is the proper second reference? — plays a man who wakes up in a hotel room with a dead guy and a briefcase full of cash, and can’t remember anything, including his own name. He might be a secret agent or he might be a janitor — Les Mayfield, the director, and Robert Adetuyi and George Gallo, the scriptwriters, try (not very successfully) to keep you guessing.  Ms. Sheridan soon turns up, saying she’s the amnesiac’s wife, and Ms. Liu checks in as an apparent girlfriend, but neither is what she seems. Everyone is eager to get hold of a missing computer chip.  This could have been a wry parody of the “Bourne” movies, but the script isn’t savvy enough, and the Big Man’s performance isn’t subtle enough. So it ends up being something at which a grown-up could safely drop a 13-year-old, rather than something parent and child would both enjoy. (Commendably, it’s relatively benign as these types of movies go, if you don’t count a scene with Ms. Sheridan wearing not too much lingerie.)  The standout is DeRay Davis as a janitor with hip-hop aspirations; in the film’s one memorable scene, he begs an agent to shoot him to improve his rap credentials. It makes you wish Mr. Davis had been given the lead.  “Code Name: The Cleaner” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) because Ms. Sheridan looks criminally good in underwear.

When the closing-credit outtakes during "Code Name: The Cleaner" prove almost wholly unfunny, it's doubly enlightening in terms of the haphazard exercise that preceded them, inasmuch as Cedric the Entertainer is shown riffing through variations on most of his lines -- dovetailing with the movie's general disregard for script or story. January is usually not the time to expect much high art among new releases, but this is an especially limp star vehicle that delivers a few widely spaced moments of frivolity before what should be a quick mop-up trip to the DVD aisles.
Director Les Mayfield has a relatively long roster of not terribly distinguished but occasionally profitable comedies to his credit, the more recent including "The Man" and "Blue Streak." Here, he almost entirely hands the reins to producer and star Cedric, a talented fellow who can't generate enough mirth to breathe life into this stale spy spoof.
Cedric plays Jake, who awakens in a hotel room next to a dead FBI agent with no memory of who he is or how he got there. Stumbling out, he's picked up by the beautiful Diane (Nicollette Sheridan), who professes to be his wife and whisks him away to a sprawling mansion.
Surveying his circumstances, Jake lets loose one of the movie's few clever lines: "Am I Lionel Richie?"
Ah, but those shadowy flashbacks in his head suggest that Jake might be some sort of spy, and the fact that people are chasing him puts him in a classic Hitchcockian nightmare, the everyman harboring some sought-after prize. Escaping Diane and her henchmen, Jake hooks up with a waitress (Lucy Liu) who insists he is simply a janitor, the blow to the head having infused him with delusions of grandeur.
Working from a script credited to Robert Adetuyi and George Gallo, Mayfield can't decide whether he wants to make a full-blown (if cut-rate, by way of Vancouver) spy movie or a screwball comedy. As such, the action periodically screeches to a halt so Cedric can engage in some bit of buffoonery (a Dutch dance number proves wooden in more ways than one) or another performer can step in to do the same. On that latter score, both DeRay Davis and Niecy Nash, as Jake's co-workers, at least inject some life into this otherwise moribund affair, albeit by delivering what are in essence stand-up interludes.
These wackier ingredients prove especially difficult for Liu, who wrestles more painfully than most with the stilted dialogue. On the plus side, she gets to put some of those "Kill Bill" martial-arts chops to use and (along with Cedric) is bestowed one of the 15 producer credits, which surely must be some kind of record for a project this modest in scope.
Although there's a long history of outlandish action comedies, those responsible for "The Cleaner" have failed to recognize the basic need to blend the disparate elements together, instead of splicing two movies into one by making a cheap spy yarn and ad-libbing some comedy. Whether that was the precise formula, it's surely not new, not improved and by no means potent enough to get the job done.

