In College , a trio of high school seniors — a shyly presentable normal guy (Drake Bell), a chubby motormouth (Andrew Caldwell) who spews his every colorful porno thought, and a boyishly bespectacled geek virgin (Kevin Covais) — spend a weekend crashing frat parties at Fieldmont University, where all three are prospective freshmen. The movie is Animal House  crossed with (warning! Very frightening thought coming!) an incredibly dumbed-down Superbad . You know how much times have changed when you meet the main fraternity's Bluto figure, a paramilitary psycho named Bearcat (Gary Owen) whose most evolved activity is playing paintball sniper. That's as innovative as the movie gets.
Our heroes go to a girls-gone-mildly-wild, drink-till-you-puke bash in which each one of them wastes no time hooking up with a babe (yeah, right). The next night, they go to another party, this one with strippers and Verne Troyer (as himself). The dialogue runs to such witty observations as ''On a scale of one to 10, boobies are a 9,000!'' Friendly yet toothless, College  musters little energy even as anarchic-party-movie nostalgia. Maybe that's because in Animal House , there was a real institution to rebel against — it was called college — whereas here, the frat house has become the institution. The characters go through the rituals of hedonism, humiliation, and revenge as dutifully as if they were applying for their first corporate jobs.


Hardly superbad, but sorta OK, "College" solves for X in an equation with young TV actors plus fake IDs, bare skin and bodily fluids. Summer's final weekend may draw underagers to pic's familiarly tapped keg, wherein a road trip brings three geeky, horny high school boys to a college campus for American pie, frathouse hazing and the nerds' revenge, in that order. Begrudging chuckles come via ultra-crude gags, none yuckier than that of the "pre-frosh" trio doing unsanitary body shots off a furry jock called Bearcat.
Sporting sideburns, Nickelodeon alum Drake Bell earns pic's few mellow moments as a cutie photographer who traipses from one barely delineated g.f. (Alona Tal) to another (Haley Bennett). Andrew Caldwell and former "American Idol" contestant Kevin Covais steal one or two scenes apiece as, respectively, the tubby slob who scarfs cereal straight from the box and the four-eyed wimp whose physical education is limited to lifting physics textbooks. Well-paced pic, shot in New Orleans, looks intermittently dark and splotchy. Music is embarrassingly out of date; opening credits are splayed on jerseys, cig-strewn concrete, a cell phone and, yes, pre-frosh flesh.
Camera (color), Dan Stoloff; editor, David Codron; music, Transcenders; music supervisors, Joel C. High, Rebecca Rienks; production designer, Ethan Tobman; set decorator, Dorree Cooper; costume designer, Caroline Marx. Reviewed at Kerasotes Block E Stadium 15, Minneapolis, Aug. 28, 2008. MPAA Rating: R. Running time: 94 MIN.
 

