A latecomer to colonialism, King Leopold II of Belgium searched the world for a satellite to call his very own, finally finding his prey in the Congo region of Africa. Hiding his greed behind the twinned fictions of charity and philanthropy, the king entered the Congo with the help of the explorer Henry Morton Stanley and quickly strong-armed tribal chiefs into signing away their future. Soon after, representatives from Europe and the United States delivered the region - renamed the Congo Free State, later Zaire and now the Democratic Republic of Congo - into Leopold's rapacious care. The ghastly story of Leopold's reign of terror in Africa during the late 19th- and early-20th centuries forms the subject of the documentary "Congo: White King, Red Rubber, Black Death," from the British filmmaker Peter Bate. Heavily loaded with information - including numbing accounts of countless atrocities - the film weaves together contemporary documentary material, archival photographs, talking-head interviews and, problematically, theatrical re-enactments featuring actors dressed in period costume. Although too compressed by half, the film manages to recreate what, at one point, the hectoring narrator will call an "archaeology of repression." The scope of that repression is staggering. For Leopold, having a colony was the way to greatness and nothing would stand in the way of that greatness - or profits from the rubber trade:  not morality, not decency, not God. Under his command, his soldiers engaged in what would now probably fall under the definition of genocide. In one of the documentary's most chilling moments, an actor coolly reads an excerpt from a diary kept by an officer under Leopold's command: "Village set on fire. Dinner then return." And there is the matter of mutilation: the king's soldiers, in a bid to stave off waste, were ordered to bring back a severed native hand for each cartridge they fired. The hands were later smoked and preserved. Word of the Congo's misery eventually leaked into Europe and the king's evil was made public. Crowds booed his funeral cortege and another depressing chapter in African history seemed to close, though not for long. The narrator states that the statues of Leopold scattered throughout Belgium are "monuments to a nation's denial." This may be true, but the same could be said of most if not all such statues throughout the world. As the director of the Royal Museum for Central Africa in Belgium said matter-of-factly, "King Leopold also was a man of vision; you can strongly disagree with his vision, but he did have a vision." And then he adds, without a suggestion of irony that, of course, the Congo also brought "huge benefits.

A stunning indictment of Belgium's brutal colonization of the Congo in the late 19th century, Brit documaker Peter Bate's "White King, Red Rubber, Black Death" illustrates how European exploitation in Africa caused irreparable damage to the continent. Blending archival evidence, talking heads experts and theatrical dramatizations, pic aired in a shorter 52-minute version on classy Euro webs in 2004 and is now popping up in its full-length feature form at fests on the other side of the Atlantic, where it will deliver less of a shock than it must have to complacent Belgian couch potatoes.
Even the coolest reading of history places King Leopold II of Belgium among the elite of bad men, but the royal mess he made of the Congo starting in 1885 was extraordinary even by the horrific standards set by Europe's colonial period in Africa. As Oxford historian Maria Misra makes clear, the king -- a man of insecurities in the shadow of his strong father, Leopold I -- felt the desperate need to catch up with the major European powers' acquisitions of African territory.
Thus, the Congo came under Belgian control simply because it was available. Explorer Henry Stanley's trek across the African interior had confirmed the land was accessible, but Leopold's plunge into colony-building was nonetheless disastrous until Scot John Dunlop invented the pneumatic tire and launched a global demand for rubber -- Congo's richest resource.
The Congo was turned into a massive labor camp in which villages were destroyed if locals failed to work for the invading entrepreneurs. The Congo saw its population reduced by half over 40 years, with some regions' numbers even as high as 80% eradication.
The extent of Leopold's bloody project was kept secret until a shipping clerk named Edmund Dene Morel spotted irregularities in import-export documents that created the false impression that more goods were being sent from Belgium to the Congo than the other way around. By 1905, Morel was on a muck-raking mission to reveal the ongoing bloodbath, which novelist Joseph Conrad vividly captured in his novel, "Heart of Darkness." Morel, docu argues, should be remembered as the 20th century's first great human rights activist.
Perhaps most chilling in Bate's report is how vestiges of Leopold's reign of terror remain quite visible in Belgium today -- from numerous statues glorifying the heavily-bearded leader, to images of lavish buildings built with the cash derived from the Congo trade, to little chocolates in the form of hands, a reminder of the severing of hands that was policy among Leopold's henchmen.
Least effective are cutaways to a staged "trial" of the king (played imperiously and silently by actor Elie Larson) that drags pic into the realm of standard educational history pics. Nick Fraser's commanding narration lends real punch to Bate's tough-minded text.
Camera (color/B&W, DV), Renaat Lambeets; editor, Hugh Williams; music, Howard Davidson; production designer, Johan Van Essche; costume designer, Else Bogaerts; sound, Olivier Struye, Raymond Vanderslagmolen; archive research, Steven De Wilde. Reviewed at Pan African Film Festival, Los Angeles, Feb. 14, 2005. Running time: 75 MIN.
 


From 1885 until a year before his 1909 death, Belgium 's King Leopold II ruled the Congo Free State  as his personal fiefdom, enslaving the region's inhabitants for the mass production of rubber. The BBC -produced documentary Congo: White King, Red Rubber, Black Death  recounts the history of this brutal arrangement, which led to the deaths of unknown millions of Congolese. A formal hodgepodge, Congo  suffers from abrasive voice-over narration, stilted re-enactments, and an awkward courtroom conceit, but gets by on its shocking material—Belgian atrocities cataloged here include the cutting off of workers' hands and the taking of family members as hostages. Director Peter Bate coolly juxtaposes these accounts of human misery with views of opulent present-day Brussels  (where statues of Leopold still stand), protesting against the erasure of history (the film has been denounced by the current Belgian government). As for the Congolese, they continue to die: Some 4 million have perished since 1996 in the country's civil wars.
