         An interracial romance in the Deep South during World War II forms the backdrop for the sentimental drama "Constellation." Written and directed by Jordan Walker-Pearlman, the ambitious film preaches reconciliation and forgiveness as an extended group of family and friends comes together 50 years later to celebrate the life of a beloved aunt.
 
  Featuring a stalwart cast (many of whom appeared in Walker-Pearlman's 2000 drama, "The Visit") and some delicately wrought moments, the film is unable to overcome its soap opera scenario and clunky pacing.
 


         






    In flashbacks, Gabrielle Union plays the aunt, Carmel Boxer, as a young woman as she recalls, through letters, her star-crossed affair with a white Army lieutenant. The remembrances frame the more contemporary story that details the complicated web of exes and in-laws who congregate for Carmel's funeral. The fulcrum of the relationships is patriarch Helms Boxer (Billy Dee Williams), Carmel's brother and a successful painter now living in Paris. Helms returns to Huntsville, Ala., to close out Carmel's house but has no intention of attending the funeral. He is joined by his ex-wife Nancy (Lesley Ann Warren), their two grown daughters, Lucy (Melissa De Sousa) and Rosa (Zoe Saldana), and a more recent wife, Jenita (Rae Dawn Chong), all of whom have issues with Helms' emotionally aloof demeanor.
 
  The daughters, in turn, have relationship troubles of their own. Lucy's husband, Kent (Alec Newman), is dragging his feet about having children. Rosa, who was closest to Carmel, faces her former boyfriend, Erol (Hill Harper), and the mutual friend who came between them, Celeste (Ever Carradine), who happens to be the niece of Bear (David Clennon), the white man Carmel loved all those years ago.
 
  Race naturally plays a large part in what complicates each of these relationships. But it's largely an external force with society's expectations having caused the situation in which Carmel and Bear were unable to be together. With the exception of Helms, these are characters comfortable with who they are, and the color of one another's skin is irrelevant. The obstacles are emotional and will require them to be honest with themselves before mending bonds.
 
  Walker-Pearlman's strengths lie in these characterizations and his ability to draw subtle performances from his actors. However, the powerfully understated moments are undercut by the film's unwieldy structure. Any emotional momentum that builds is lost with the interminable flashbacks.
 
 
  "Constellation." MPAA rating: PG-13 for brief strong language and a sexual reference. Running time: 1 hour, 36 minutes. At selected theaters.   

Deeply odd films are often deeply personal ones, and Constellation , a dazed, inchoate drama about a mixed-race Alabama family, tells a story that's clearly close to the heart of writer-director Jordan Walker-Pearlman (The  Visit ). So close, in fact, it lacks perspective: Neither the camera nor the script can focus. After a Gothic '60s prologue (forbidden love, gang rape), the movie somnambulates into generic sentimentality. Billy Dee Williams, as the family's long-absent patriarch, reacts to this tonal retreat by looking sleepy.


Taking on a larger and more unwieldy family tree than he dramatized in "The Visit," writer-director Jordan Walker-Pearlman's ambitious "Constellation" explores the legacy of a forbidden, 40-year-old biracial love affair and its effect on an extended family reuniting at a funeral. Old concept is mildly updated with a complicated network of relations and a guiding sense that many contempo Southern kin are a blend of black and white. Exceptionally strong cast is pic's beating heart and the key to luring a distrib, which could mine limited B.O. based on enthusiastic critical support. 
Auds are likely to lose track of who is related to whom at the Huntsville, Ala. funeral of beloved Carmel Boxer (Gabrielle Union), who had an unrequited romance with a dashing white Army recruit named Bear (Daniel Bess as the younger Bear, David Clennon as Bear in the present). Even after their tragic separation, Carmel continued writing him letters (all unanswered) over the years, missives narrated gracefully by Union.
Carmel's brother Helms (Billy Dee Williams) is now estranged from the family, uneasily greeting ex-wife Nancy (Lesley Ann Warren) and daughters Rosa (Zoe Saldana) and Lucy (Melissa De Sousa), along with the more recent love in his life Jenita (Rae Dawn Chong), and wanting nothing to do with Bear or his niece Celeste (Ever Carradine).
Even though Helms is the family member who wants least to be here, Carmel has requested he take care of her estate. The family knows of his unease, and tricks him thinking the burial has already taken place (until talkative and eager-to-please Lucy blurts out the truth over dinner).
Walker-Pearlman is clearly aware of his ensemble's abilities, and lets them go for some uncommonly long scenes of dialogue -- and thoughtful silences -- that encompass a wide range of rich feelings. The most intriguing of these revolve around Rosa and her ex-b.f. Errol (Hill Harper), who wants dearly to recover their past love, but has a difficult time convincing Rosa.
The moments between Harper and Saldana best express the film's oft-repeated theme of unrequited love. But like a string quartet stuck on a measure, the theme is so often re-stated that "Constellation" becomes a mannered film with limited imagination, dogged by an oddly jagged pace that makes viewing laborious.
The actors raise the pic a few pegs. The underused Warren brings her every moment alive, leading a magnificent roster of women, including Saldana, De Sousa, Chong and Union, whose role, admittedly, has little scope. Harper, as usual, is an actor of highly attuned sensitivity, while Clennon is interesting in a straight-ahead perf. Comparatively, Williams comes across as uninspired, failing to convey emotional edge.
Staging by Walker-Pearlman favors serpentine widescreen camera moves around actors who are usually paired in dialogue, forging a tone both serious and somewhat repetitious. John Njaga Demps' autumnal-hued lensing lovingly frames the thesps, though Michael Bearden's score is a slab of romantic excess.
Camera (color, Panavision widescreen), John Njaga Demps; editor, Allison Learned Wolfe; music, Michael Bearden; music supervisor, Howie Dorough; production designer, Liba Daniels; art director, Geoff Cormier; set decorator, Margaret Thigpen; costume designer, Jeanette Guillermo; sound, Thomas Morrison; assistant director, Frank Pinnock. Reviewed at Pan African Film Festival (Centerpiece), Feb. 21, 2005. Running time: 105 MIN.
 

