 The Italian writer Primo Levi, looking back on his time in Auschwitz, observed that in the Nazi death camps “the worst,  that is, the fittest,  survived.” “The Counterfeiters,” a brisk, tough new movie from the Austrian director Stefan Ruzowitzky, is in some ways an illustration of this axiom. Like most films about the Holocaust it is a survivor’s tale, and its protagonist, at least at first, seems long on guile and short on scruple. He is Salomon Sorowitsch, a master forger and a fixture of the Berlin underworld, and his yellow star is overlaid with a green triangle marking his status as a “habitual criminal.”  This causes some discomfort among some of the other inmates at the Sachsenhausen camp, where Sorowitsch is recruited for an unusual work detail. An enterprising Nazi officer, who had arrested Sally before the war for falsifying currency, enlists him in a scheme to counterfeit British and American money. The plan — based on the real-life Operation Bernhard — is to destabilize the economies of those countries with large-scale infusions of fake pounds and dollars.  In exchange for their labor Sally and his colleagues are given extraordinary privileges: civilian clothing, weekly showers, sheets and pillows on their beds. And this fragile good fortune provides “The Counterfeiters” with its ethical center of gravity. The questions Mr. Ruzowitzky poses are both stark and complicated. How much cooperation with evil is justified in the name of survival? How can the imperative to stay alive compete with the obligations to help others, and to oppose injustice?  Sally, played by a remarkable, hatchet-faced actor with the striking name Karl Markovics, approaches these conundrums not with the discipline of a philosopher, but rather with the self-protective instincts of an outlaw. He does, nonetheless, adhere to the rudiments of a thief’s code of honor, surveying every new situation for possible risks and advantages and refusing, under any circumstances, to squeal on a comrade.  He thus charts a zigzagging path between two other major characters: Herzog (Devid Striesow), the cynical, jocular Nazi who oversees Bernhard, and Burger (August Diehl), an idealistic prisoner who wants to subvert the plan.  Burger, whose wide brow and upright carriage stand in pronounced contrast to Sorowitsch’s darting eyes and spidery movements, is the film’s designated man of principle. A left-wing activist, he was imprisoned for printing anti-Nazi leaflets, and he struggles to maintain a clear view of the political implications of his and the others’ actions. He decides to slow down Operation Bernhard by sabotaging the counterfeiting process, a delay that threatens the lives of his co-workers and brings him into conflict with Sorowitsch, who sometimes seems to view their assignment as a professional challenge more than anything else.  But if Sally Sorowitsch is a crook, he is also something of an artist, and Mr. Markovics, without sentimentalizing the character, allows us glimpses of his soul. His performance is a tour de force of concentration and understatement, and it gives Mr. Ruzowitzky’s sometimes schematic narrative a jolt of realism. “The Counterfeiters” is a swift and suspenseful thriller, and perhaps a little too entertaining for its own good. The grim scenes in Sachsenhausen are framed by a visit to postwar Monte Carlo that adds a queasy touch of romanticism to the tale.  I suppose that is a built-in dilemma of the Holocaust movie as a genre. Filmmakers either try to take the full, horrible measure of the subject, at the risk of overwhelming or alienating a modern audience, or else, in trying to make the story bearable, they subvert its truth. “The Counterfeiters,” in the manner of its flawed, fascinating hero, tries in good faith to navigate this ethically treacherous ground. That it succeeds more than it fails owes something to Mr. Ruzowitsky’s skill and good sense, and even more to his lead actor’s instinct and conviction.  “The Counterfeiters” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has some scenes of intense violence, and also some nudity.  THE COUNTERFEITERS  

The moral quandary of Nazi complicity is revisited in taut drama "The Counterfeiters," which tells the true story of a disparate group of imprisoned artists, financiers and swindlers secretly assembled in a concentration camp to forge millions of pound and dollar notes to support the German war effort. Tough subject matter and a crafty lead perf from Austrian-born tube vet Karl Markovics as a Russian Jew who goes along to get along will earn genuine interest from fests, distribs and ancillary providers.
A brief preamble introduces 45-year-old Salomon Sorowitsch (Markovics), a gaunt, hatchet-faced man in a threadbare suit who's appeared in the gambler's mecca of Monte Carlo at the end of World War II with a suitcase full of crisp American banknotes.
Following success at the tables and a roll in the hay that reveals a concentration camp number on his arm, story flashes back to "Sally's" halcyon days in 1936 Berlin as a talented forger and enthusiastic bon vivant. "Why earn money by making art?" he says. "Earning money by making money is much easier." 
The gravy train dries up when he's arrested by police inspector Herzog (David Striesow) and sent to the particularly violent Mauthausen camp. Currying favor with captors via a blend of obsequiousness and opportunism, Sally is soon the resident sketch artist, before being mysteriously transferred, five years later, to Sachsenhausen.
He's been hand-picked by Herzog, now a commandant, to coordinate a team of experts forced to counterfeit pounds, then dollars, to destabilize respective economies and fill Nazi coffers. But not everyone's as pragmatic as Sorowitsch, who finds the dollar project continuously sabotaged by stubbornly idealistic collotype specialist Adolf Burger (August Diehl), on whose memoir script is based. As moral debates and stalling strategies swirl amongst the counterfeiters, Herzog's impatience grows and the Nazi war machine begins to falter.
Austrian-born helmer Stefan Ruzowitzky continues his move away from the visual surface gloss of early work, including German horror franchise "Anatomy," towards the rougher, more jittery approach pioneered in his previous effort, war-set English-lingo comedic misfire "All the Queen's Men." New pic reps fine balance of style with story.
As in recent Hungarian camp drama "Fateless," the horror here comes not from explicit atrocities -- though pic has abrupt, jagged violence -- but from the large-scale tragedy implied on the other side of the workshop compound's thin plywood walls. Random screams and gunshots are heard at all hours, though the specialists themselves are treated to good food, comfortable bedding, piped-in opera music, and even, incongruously, a ping-pong table. When the walls finally come down, the gulf between their health and the camp's squalor neatly underscores deeper moral ramifications.
Nuanced interplay among Markovics, Diehl and Striesow is pic's main focus, with supporting players vividly drawn.
Other tech aspects are fine, led by meticulous production design of counterfeiters' lair. Pic is skedded for mid-March German release.

Near the beginning of The Counterfeiters , a fact-based Holocaust drama by Austrian filmmaker Stefan Ruzowitzky , we meet Jewish money forger and former jailbird Salomon Sorowitsch  (brilliantly played by Karl Markovics ), packing to flee Berlin  in 1936 with a suitcase full of fake money. We know from an opening coda that Sorowitsch will survive the war, but for now his cockiness doesn't save him from arrest by an old nemesis, counterfeit inspector Friedrich Herzog  (Devid Striesow ). Herzog, himself a smooth operator who's ravenous for career advancement, soon resurfaces as a camp commandant, rescuing Sorowitsch from Mauthausen , where he's made himself useful painting flattering portraits of SS functionaries, and bringing him to the Sachsenhausen  camp in Germany. There, sequestered in a relatively cushy laboratory with a select team of similarly skilled inmates, Soro-witsch will oversee the mass production of fake dollars and pounds sterling, with which the Germans plan to flood the British and American economies and so bring them to ruin.
Sorowitsch is no hero, and when an Austrian filmmaker who makes no secret of the fact that his grandparents were Nazi sympathizers takes as his subject a Jewish shyster who survived the Holocaust by giving his captors what they wanted, is he a brave boy or a rotten apple falling unpleasantly close to his nation's tarnished tree?
Ruzowitzky is hardly the first director to pry Holocaust cinema loose from its reverential focus on saintly Jewish victims trodden down by goose-stepping aggressors. From Schindler's List  on through last year's Black Book , not to mention a host of documentaries, filmmakers on both sides of the Atlantic have moved to take the hero/villain equation out of the 20th century's worst nightmare. Ruzowitzky lives and works in a country known more for self-pity and prevarication than for remorseful introspection about its role in propping up the Third Reich . Still, it's a positive step that Austria  submitted The Counterfeiters  for 2007's Best Foreign Film Oscar (for which it is nominated), though I shudder to think what will be made of this admirably opaque movie in a country that kept former Wehrmacht officer Kurt Waldheim  in office and tolerates right-wing extremists like Jörg Haider .
The Counterfeiters  is based on a memoir by Adolf Burger  (played in the movie by August Diehl ), the lab's Communist idealist, who makes no bones about his disgust for Sorowitsch's collusion with the equally crooked Herzog and advocates sabotaging the Nazi money-printing scheme. The movie plays like a sepia-toned realist drama whose purpose is to spring Sorowitsch from stereotype and expose him as a flawed, even damaged man torn between his Darwinian credo (adapt) and a fatherly desire to protect the weak. But The Counterfeiters  is also peopled with types—the socialist rebel, the bourgeois Prussian banker, the kindly kapo  doctor, the sadistic Nazi underling. Shifty-eyed, hatchet-faced, and with an eye for comely German shiksas, Sorowitsch himself sails a touch too close for comfort to Nazi cartoons of the sex-obsessed criminal Yid. But Ruzowitzky means to humanize him, not make him likable, just as he means to show that Burger's impetuous rebellion places his comrades in danger for the sake of a principle that may or may not be worth upholding under such duress. What physical brutality there is in the movie is kept peripheral, in part to underscore the dreadful predicament of the lab workers. (What must it have been like to live in such relative luxury while, all around them, inmates suffered and died under appalling conditions?)
At its best—and queasiest—The Counterfeiters  asks disturbing questions more commonly found in the survivor literature of Primo Levi  or Bruno Bettelheim  than at the movies. Without resorting to the crassly relativist reversals in Paul Verhoeven 's idiotic Black Book  (treacherous resisters! sensitive Nazis! who knew?), Ruzowitzky quietly asks what counts as moral behavior under fascism, and whether or not one's first duty is to survive. Such questioning plagued Primo Levi all his life, and it may take Germany and Austria down a rocky path: Last week, I read an owp-ed by a German woman who suggested that her countrymen might want to look for more "positive" World War II role models than the leaders of the White Rose  student resistance movement, who, like Burger, endangered the lives of their colleagues and ended up literally losing their heads.
In the end, The Counterfeiters  caves to a heroic story of sorts, implying that appeasing the enemy only depletes the spirit, and dreaming up a penitent act for Soro-witsch that's unsupported by the evidence. But Ruzowitzky complicates the battle between pragmatism and idealism by facing up to the fact that the Nazi machine rode roughshod over the brave and the feckless alike, that survival in the camps was largely a matter of luck and stamina, and those who had it were left with crippling survivor's guilt. For all his literary acclaim, Levi battled repeated depressions and is thought to have ended his own life, while Sally Sorowitsch  reportedly thrived as an art forger in Argentina.
