 The flesh is weak but the spirit is indestructible in “Cover,” a ham-fisted morality tale eager to prove that infidelity may be bad but playing with a member of one’s own team is infinitely worse.  Structured primarily in flashback around one of the most inept interrogation scenes in movie history, “Cover” introduces us to Valerie Maas (Aunjanue Ellis), a photographer and saintly homemaker suspected of murder. “I’m innocent,” she protests while a solitary light plays across her face like Noir 101. “I’m a Christian.” Tell that to a detective who isn’t played by someone as old as Louis Gossett Jr.  But Valerie’s troubles are not limited to the hackneyed mise-en-scène: there’s also a distant husband (Raz Adoti), his steamy boss (Paula Jai Parker) and a couple of old college buddies (Roger Guenveur Smith and Leon) who apparently majored in hound dog. No wonder she escapes to the comfort of the Women’s Faith Fellowship, where the general worthlessness of men is always on the agenda.  Leaving no cheating-husband stone unturned — the condom in the wallet, the hotel room of sin — the director, Bill Duke, presents a buppie Eden corrupted not by money but by homosexuality. Within its borders, well-heeled husbands frolicking on the down low isn’t just a problem, it’s an epidemic. The sledgehammer message is clear: Best friends can help when you need a McMansion, but only God can help when your husband needs a man.  “Cover” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has two men in the shower, one woman on drugs and no reason to care.

This wackily uneven drama from director Bill Duke  opens with Atlanta photographer and housewife Valerie Maas  (Aunjanue Ellis ) sitting in a police interrogation room trying to explain to a doubting detective (Lou Gossett Jr.)  why she's not guilty of murder. Flashbacks reveal that Valerie and her husband Dutch (Razaaq Adoti ) have become entangled in the sordid lives of Dutch's new boss (Roger Guenveur Smith ) and a creepy rap star (the actor known as "Leon") who has set his sights on Valerie. These folks are knee-deep in sin, the nitty-gritty details of which it wouldn't be fair to reveal. This is a weirdly schizophrenic movie, one that's light on the murder mystery and heavy on the sermonizing, particularly when Valerie's church-basement women's group—which seems to meet hourly—starts wailing about the devilish temptations luring African-American men from God and family. Duke appears to be aiming for a Tyler Perry –style mix of the taboo and the saintly, but his touch is leaden.
