         Sebastián Cordero's "Crónicas" opens strongly: Hotshot reporter Manolo Bonilla (John Leguizamo) for a Spanish-language TV tabloid news program in Miami, heads for an Ecuadorian village that has become the latest target for a serial rapist and killer of children who may also have struck in other South American countries. He and his producer Marisa (Leonor Watling) and cameraman Ivan (José María Yazpik) have arrived just in time for Bonilla to save a man set afire.
 
  A local man, Don Lucho (Henry Layana), has just learned that one of his sons has fallen victim to the killer only to have the boy's twin brother struck by a truck driven by Vinicio (Damián Alcazar, in a complex portrayal), a traveling Bible salesman, who lives in the town.
 


         






    Although it turns out that the boy was killed by his head hitting on a rock in the street when struck by the truck, Don Lucho, crazed by grief and aided by other men, takes it out on Vinicio. With Ivan's camera rolling, Bonilla , a Latino media celebrity, steps forward and saves Vinicio's life.
 
  The local police captain (Camilo Luzuriaga) arrests and imprisons Vinicio, who so fears for his life that he tells Bonilla he will reveal to the reporter the identity of the serial killer.
 
  At this point the picture turns into a cat-and-mouse game, with Bonilla sensing the story of a lifetime landing in his lap while Vinicio strings him along, yet at the same time Vinicio behaves in such a manner to suggest that he could be the killer, working toward an urge to confess.
 
  Cordero sets up this situation with a gritty terseness but is hard put to maintain momentum and ingenuity. Even so, the result is reasonably absorbing and a provocative if familiar commentary on media manipulation, with Leguizamo terrific in a serious, intense performance as a smart, ambitious young man moving inexorably toward a moral crossroads.
 
 "Crónicas": 
Rated R for violence, a scene of sexuality and language. At selected theaters.   

 In the sometimes savvy media melodrama "Crónicas," John Leguizamo plays Manolo Bonilla, the charismatic star reporter for a tabloid investigative news show, "One Hour With the Truth," that originates in Miami and is broadcast across Latin America. A swaggering little fame monger ablaze with ambition and hot to pounce on the next gory sensation, Manolo descends with his producer, Marisa (Leonor Watling), and his cameraman, Ivan (José María Yazpik), on the dirt-poor Ecuadorian village of Babahoyo.  Manolo has come to interview the relatives of three local children who were slaughtered by the notorious "Monster of Babahoyo," the television nickname for a serial murderer of children who rapes and tortures his victims before killing them.  His arrival coincides with the return to Babahoyo of Vinicio Cepeda (Damián Alcázar), a scruffy, soulful-eyed traveling Bible salesman. Driving into the village, Vinicio accidentally strikes and kills a young boy who darts in front of his truck.  Aghast and guilt-stricken, Vinicio backs his vehicle away from the body. But as he does, he is set upon by villagers swarming around the scene, who assume he was trying to escape. Already hysterical over the killings, they drag him from his truck, and the victim's father, Don Lucho (Henry Layana), furiously slops gasoline over him. A match is tossed. Manolo's crew films it all.  This harrowing scene of mob violence and an attempted lynching under the eye of the camera makes a great beginning. The reluctance of these tabloid news hounds to intervene says it all about live television's icy voyeurism. Anyone who has observed a news crew in action will recognize the sense of entitlement and the high-handed attitudes of jaded media types who act like God's handpicked snoops as they nose around in downscale environments where they are both adored and feared.  Nothing that follows in "Crónicas" (the word means chronicles, or news reports), which was written and directed by Sebastián Cordero, lives up to this initial tableau of chaos, grief and media intrusion. Although the fire is put out and Vinicio and his attacker are both jailed, the village is still in an uproar, and the chances that Vinicio will escape vigilante retribution seem slender. When Manolo, pursuing the incident for a story, interviews Vinicio in prison, the desperate Bible salesman tries to bargain with the reporter to shoot a segment that might influence the judge to set him free.  He coyly claims to have information about the Monster of Babahoyo. As Manolo coaxes out his story, Vinicio tells of meeting the killer in his travels and hearing his boastful confession. To prove he's not making it up, he directs Manolo to a burial site where the crew finds a girl's body but refrains from telling the police.  The movie begins losing credibility at the point at which "Crónicas" narrows to an ambiguous cat-and-mouse game played by the egomaniacal reporter sensing the scoop of his life and the prisoner whom Manolo immediately suspects is the mass murderer. Although the screenplay throws in obstacles and contradictions to deepen the texture, "Crónicas" never regains a secure footing.  We meet Vinicio's new wife, Esperanza (Gloria Leiton), and her young son from a previous marriage, Robert (Luiggi Pulla), to whom Vinicio is a devoted caretaker. Meanwhile, Manolo dallies with Marisa, who is married to the all-powerful news anchor in Miami; the fate of the story being prepared changes from hour to hour as Manolo resists pressure from on high to leave Ecuador and pursue another story in Medellín, Colombia. A strait-laced  police captain, Bolívar Rojas (Camilo Luzuriaga), does his feeble best to take charge of the investigation that Manolo has commandeered for his own career ends.  Although plenty of movies have already explored the bottom-feeding, ratings-hungry values of tabloid television, the subject certainly merits repeated scrutiny, and as "Crónicas" reaches its wobbly conclusion, it doesn't sacrifice its cynical point of view. But by the end, it has also become a film divided against itself. The more the cat-and-mouse game between prisoner and reporter points it in the direction of "The Silence of the Lambs," the closer it inches toward the sort of exploitation it condemns; for me, that's too close for "Crónicas" to be taken without a big grain of salt.  "Crónicas" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has violence and profanity.
Ecuadorian director Sebasti Cordero's sophomore effort doesn't subvert the serial-killer genre but at least preempts dim predictability by revealing el monstruo 's identity in its first frames. Save your outrage—nothing's spoiled here that wasn't meant to be. This he-dunit spins suspense from a different thematic skein. Oscillating between furor and languor, rage and repose, Crónicas  mixes ethnography with media critique, questioning the nature of truth in reportage, the media's power to effect (and affect) that truth (Alfred Molina 's gloriously glib newsmagazine host would send Tom Cruise  into conniptions), and the queasy complicity and mutual fascination between interviewer and subject.
Inspired by a gruesome real-life trio of South American serial killers (among them Luis Alfredo Garavito, who shocked Colombia  with the murders of about 140 children), Crónicas follows Miami tabloid TV correspondent Manolo Bonilla  (John Leguizamo ) and his crew (Leonor Watling  and José Mar Yazpik) as they report on one such killer in Babahoyo, Ecuador , failing Journalistic Ethics 101 in the process. (The seductive power of news production is little match, however, for that of Watling's immersive eyes and Castilian sibilant S —a lovely contrast to Leguizamo's Nuyorican-by-way-of-Colombia, mestizo tones.) Leguizamo finds the right mute for his trumpet, modulating his expenditure of emotion to the requirements of the scenario rather than overengaging his capable Mambo Mouth. He's aided by the film's strong sense of place; sorrow's descent on Babahoyo feels as perpetual and all-consuming as the torrents of rain that drench the region, and the town itself—much of it suspended over water on ramshackle bamboo bridges—threatens to collapse from its own psychological detritus.
