
The inner-city basketball drama ``Crossover" is not a well-made movie, to put it mildly. Shot on grimy digital video, with a formulaic script and woebegone dialogue, it represents the directing debut of screenwriter Preston A. Whitmore II (``Fled"), but it's safe to say that the movie hasn't been directed so much as edited.
The only scenes that spring to life are the basketball sequences, which have been cut to a mixmastered, bombastic fare-thee-well by Stuart Acher and Anthony Adler . Whenever ``Crossover" has to deal with dialogue, you can almost hear the sneakers screech to a halt.
Yet ``Crossover" is honest enough in its inept way, to its characters and to a message that's naive but positive. Anthony Mackie (``She Hate Me," ``Million Dollar Baby ") plays a young Detroit b-ball hustler named Tech who's trying to get his GED after a stint in juvenile prison; he nurses an inferiority complex concerning his best friend Cruise (Wesley Jonathan ), who has better court moves but plans on being a doctor and has the UCLA scholarship to show for it.
Both men play in illegal ``streetball" games organized by big-time gambler Vaughn (Wayne Brady), but while Tech has dreams of pro glory, Cruise won't take the winnings since they'll ruin his eligibility. He knows the only way out is to play it straight.
``Crossover" follows the two friends as they deal with Vaughn's temptations, journey to L A to test out their futures, and get involved with new girlfriends, Eboni (Alecia Fears ) and Vanessa (Eva Pigford ), only one of whom is true blue.
That's the plot, and while you know where the climactic streetball game is going, Whitmore does throw a few unexpected shots. Tech, for one, is poised to look like a flawed antihero, but there's more to him than that, and the gifted Mackie works hard to dig out the role's few subtleties. It's also refreshing to see a movie about young black men that puts a premium on striving and doesn't bother with gangbanging and guns. There's the pulse of authentic urban life flickering here under the endless contrivances.
But, lord, does the script need work. Whitmore's dialogue bends over backward to sound street, but lines like ``Most cats don't get slick like that unless you got a brizzle on the vine" are both incomprehensible and
 forced. You might also have trouble accepting comedian/talk - show host Brady as the glowering Mr. Big, since he conveys all the menace of Pat Boone playing Scarface.
Earnest and predictable, ``Crossover" deserves more than the horselaughs that will probably greet it in theaters -- but not a lot more. The movie is harmless, which is both its strength and its weakness.


Inside an abandoned Detroit train station, past the fires blazing medievally in oil barrels, guys play street ball, a loose form of basketball where money's always on the line and ''razzle dazzle'' wins out over rules. But Crossover  skimps on court-level pyrotechnics (we get a game in the beginning and, of course, a big game at the end, and that's about it) in favor of dry urban melodrama: One player is really aiming for med school, while another (Anthony Mackie, so natural in Half Nelson , so stilted here) flies off the handle a lot.

 “Crossover” is a decent example of Sidekick Cinema: a movie to glance up at from time to time while you download ring tones or text-message your friends. Set in the rough-and-tumble world of Detroit street basketball, it features on-court showdowns you’ll want to keep an eye out for, plus buck-wild cheerleaders so scantily dressed that half the budget must have gone to Brazilian bikini waxing. From the look of the shoddy photography and no-bones production design, I’m not sure what the other half was spent on.  For those paying closer attention, the movie does have a serious moral agenda, albeit one resolved by the laziest of “where are they now” codas. Tech (Anthony Mackie) dreams of N.B.A. stardom while pursuing his G.E.D. His buddy Noah (Wesley Jonathan) is studying hard for medical school. The pursuit of their goals is complicated by a Faustian nightclub owner (Wayne Brady), the local street ball champ (Phillip Champion) and a pair of girlfriends (Alecia Fears and Eva Pigford) conceived of by the writer and director Preston A. Whitmore II as a milquetoast manicurist and a trash-talking gold digger, respectively.  Temptation, striving and rivalry are the keynotes of the movie, which is sincere in debunking the notion that the highest aspiration for a young black man is to be the next Allen Iverson. As for the game play, N.B.A. Street V3 for the Xbox isn’t losing any sleep.  “Crossover” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The language, the attitude and the representation of women come from the street.

The underground version of basketball known as streetball comes above ground in "Crossover," but the fascinating freeform game gets screened out by a ludicrous soap opera with poor dramatic moves. Overshadowed by vastly superior sports movies like "Invincible" and hardly disguising its low-budget sources, pic isn't in any kind of shape for the theatrical leagues. 
Hardscrabble Detroit is the setting for writer-director Preston A. Whitmore II's depiction of a subculture that gives rise to teams with names like "Enemy of the State" and "Platinum" sparring on a court built in a gutted-out Greco-Roman train station. Opening-credits montage presents ex-sports agent Vaughn (Wayne Brady) as the hotshot CEO of the local streetball scene, which places a premium on betting, with a minimum on rules. Even the cops place bets with Vaughn.
For reasons that become clear only much later, Enemy captain Tech (Anthony Mackie) tells studious friend Cruise (Wesley Jonathan) to suit up for the game because he owes him a favor. This doesn't help the squad, which loses to overpowering Platinum, led by smack-talking, power-dribbling phenom Jewelz (actual streetball player Phillip "Hot Sauce" Champion).
A signal that Whitmore's script is in need of a rewrite is how Vaughn's love interest Nikki (Kristen Wilson) is used as a crude aud surrogate to be schooled on this wildcat version of hoops, only to then quickly exit the movie for good.
Disappointingly, after this first game, there isn't another one until nearly 85 minutes later. In between is an ersatz drama placing Tech at odds with both Cruise and Vaughn. Cruise knew that playing in the streetball match could jeopardize his med school scholarship; this foolish decision by an otherwise smart dude attracts Vaughn, who knows Cruise has NBA-caliber skills (though they're barely on display) and wants to pitch him to the pros. But Cruise doesn't want an NBA career.
The rickety script turns the ball over, though, when the guys hook up with two women, serious Eboni (Alecia Fears) and crafty Vanessa (Eva Pigford), who work at a nail salon. Vanessa's an obvious gold-digger who veritably coos when Cruise tells her his plans to be a doctor. This leads to an absurdly conceived venture to Los Angeles --depicted as the land of broken dreams -- and even a sequence on the lot of the pic's distrib, Sony.
A comic treatment would have clearly benefited "Crossover," but Whitmore's apparent taste for a meller ruins what could have been a fun time.
Mackie, a usually good actor, looks out of sorts, but is momentarily lifted by verbal sparring with his teenage buddy named Up (an energetic Lil' J.J.), who pairs with Tech to hustle locals in two-on-two games. Perfs tend to stiffen by the reel, since dialogue and character are hackneyed, and even Brady succumbs to the problem.
HD transfer to film is decent, but hardly helps the look of a film where one camera setup after another is vanilla-plain. Court action is only fair, with a flurry of cutaways as balls make -- or miss -- the net. Production values are basically indie quality, while even Whitmore's Detroit hometown seems more like a backdrop than a real burg.
