 Because of concerns about climate change, a lot of current environmentalist advocacy — including movies like “An Inconvenient Truth” — concentrates on the dire results of burning fossil fuels. Joe Berlinger’s “Crude,” a thorough and impassioned new documentary, focuses its gaze on production rather than consumption. The film, which follows the fitful progress of a class-action lawsuit undertaken on behalf of the people  of the Ecuadorean Amazon, is not about the unintended consequences of using petroleum.  Instead, it examines the terrible, frequently unacknowledged costs of extracting oil from the ground.  “Crude,” in other words, investigates the local manifestations — cancer, contaminated water, cultural degradation — of a global problem. It also, more by what it shows than what it says, suggests that such a distinction is no longer tenable.  Multinational corporations (like Chevron, this film’s designated villain) move money and commodities from one place to another, often with slight regard for the sovereignty or customs of any place in particular. And so the lawyers and activists who oppose these conglomerates have tried to  become equally mobile and adaptable, moving continually in the zigzagging paths traced by transnational capitalism.  Even as “Crude” dwells on a single, relatively small slice of territory (about the size of Rhode Island), its action shifts from muddy villages in Amazonia to law offices and shareholders’ meetings in the steel-and-glass cities of North America, drawing into its purview a motley cast of scientists, human rights crusaders, civil servants and international celebrities.  Like almost every other recent documentary on a politically charged topic, “Crude” does not pretend to neutrality. Yet while  Mr. Berlinger’s sympathies clearly lie with the oddly matched pair of lawyers — Steven Donziger, a big, outgoing American, and Pablo Fajardo, a wiry, diffident Ecuadorean — who are consumed by the now 16-year-old suit against Chevron, he is fair-minded enough to include rebuttals from the company’s executives and in-house environmental scientists.  And since this is, in part, a courtroom drama, both sides have a chance to be heard. The Ecuadorean practice of conducting parts of the trial in the field generates some oddly theatrical moments as lawyers deliver florid,  impromptu speeches al fresco, in front of huts or at the edges of waste sites.  Too many filmmakers seem to think that a noble cause, a good heart and a digital video camera are all that is required for an effective documentary. Luckily, Mr. Berlinger has both a strong narrative instinct and a keen eye for incongruous, evocative and powerful images. His previous work includes the thoughtful true-crime stories “Brother’s Keeper” and “Paradise Lost” and also the superb heavy-metal psychodrama “Metallica: Some Kind of Monster.” What these films have in common with one another, and with “Crude,” which Mr. Berlinger worked on for three years, is a strong sense of character and an openness to the unexpected.  Even as this film presses its muckraking agenda, it does so with a welcome sense of human foible and contradiction. Mr. Fajardo, who worked in the oil fields as a young man, blames Chevron (current owner of Texaco, which opened up his home region to drilling) for many of the ills that have befallen his family and his people. In the course of “Crude” he becomes something of a star in the Western news and entertainment media, profiled in Vanity Fair, showered with awards and posing for pictures with Sting after a benefit concert.  Meanwhile, Chevron’s Ecuadorean lawyers portray the suit as a money-making scheme bankrolled by a Manhattan law firm, and base their defense simultaneously on appealing  to national pride and   blaming  the state-run petroleum company, which took over from Texaco in the early 1990s. The case takes an interesting swerve when Rafael Correa, a young economist with populist tendencies, is elected Ecuador’s president and publicly supports the plaintiffs’ position.  But “Crude” presents no easy resolution, since the legal struggle — and the public relations war between big companies and those who feel preyed upon by them — is unlikely to end soon. Behind that conflict lies a long and complicated history, and ahead of us lie many more documentaries similar in tone and spirit to this one. We can hope that at least a few of them are as intelligently and artfully made.

Breaking from the intimate nonfiction dramas of his prior features ("Brother's Keeper," "Paradise Lost," "Metallica: Some Kind of Monster"), Joe Berlinger's latest docu is an issue-oriented activist effort about corporate malfeasance and environmental catastrophe. Charting still-unresolved efforts by Ecuadorian tribes to get recompense from oil companies for pollution that has destroyed their land, culture and lives over recent decades, the pic makes an engrossing case for justice. Filmmaker's rep should give this a leg up to limited theatrical release, with wider broadcast exposure to follow.
Some 30,000 surviving tribespeople are plaintiffs in a seemingly neverending lawsuit against Chevron, which in 2001 merged with Texaco. Latter built drilling/waste-dumping systems decades ago that many argue permanently poisoned the region's Amazonian water, air and soil, leading to sky-high cancer deaths and other woes. Chevron's argument -- voiced by spokespersons and lawyers who come off as shills here -- is that any blame should be placed on the state-owned biz that took over Ecuador's oil production several years ago. Evidence is damning, however. Colorful personalities on both sides, incriminating new/archival footage, slick assembly and Berlinger's narrative smarts make this unusually involving edutainment.
Camera (color, HD), Juan Diego Perez, Pocho Alvarez, Berlinger, Michael Bonfiglio; editor, Alyse Ardell Spiegel; music, Wendy Blackstone. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 19, 2009. Running time: 104 MIN.
 


Water, water everywhere, but not a drop to drink. Why? Because it's thick with sludge. Moving briskly through a stranger-than-fiction, serpentine narrative that is still unfolding, Joe Berlinger 's remarkable documentary, Crude , recounts an infuriating litany of South American exploitation, backroom glad-handing, and bureaucratic dead ends that has, among other collateral damages, created a Rhode Island –size "death zone" of toxic pollution in the middle of the Ecuadorian Amazon.
For nearly 30 years, beginning in the mid-1960s, the former Texaco  oil company (acquired by Chevron in 2001) drilled for oil in Ecuador , in and around the ancestral homeland of the indigenous Cofán Indian community. In 1992, Texaco finally lost its government-granted concession and was forced to cede control of its drilling sites to state-owned Petroecuador . Three years later, Texaco conducted a purported "environmental remediation" as part of a $40 million settlement with the Ecuadorian government that, in turn, indemnified the company against any further government claims. And yet today, the soil and water of the area still run black with oil, the Cofán are dying of cancer at an alarming rate, and the buck for this enviro-disaster is being passed between Chevron and Petroecuador faster than a Bobby Hull  slap shot.
A master of true-crime vérité, Berlinger previously co-directed (with longtime filmmaking partner Bruce Sinofsky ) Brother's Keeper , centered on a fratricide trial in the dairy-farming community of Munnsville , New York, and the two Paradise Lost  documentaries, about the ongoing travails of three Arkansas teenagers questionably convicted of murder. In the gripping, intrinsically cinematic Crude , he does an equally superb job of taking us through the twists and turns of the decade-and-a-half, multibillion-dollar class-action lawsuit filed by the Cofán against Chevron—a legal battle nearly as long as the Amazon itself, and with no discernible end in sight. (To wit, a September 1 New York Times  article reports that bribery allegations raised by Chevron against the judge in the case could once again delay a judgment.) Berlinger, who arrives in Ecuador just as the evidentiary phase of the trial is about to begin, presents both sides of the case as objectively as possible, never inserting himself into the narrative, and turning the audience, in effect, into a jury. Chevron even sends its in-house environmental scientist to make its case to Berlinger, though the defensive interview that results plays like a Tilda Swinton  outtake from Michael Clayton  .
The rest of the supporting cast is a colorful assortment, from Steven Donziger , the Cofán's fiery American environmental attorney, to Pablo Fajardo , the 25-year-old former field worker who improbably finds himself as lead prosecutor in the case, to . . . Trudie Styler ? Sure enough, at a key moment in Crude , the advocacy-minded Mrs. Sting develops a passionate interest in the plight of the Cofán, and her involvement leads directly to a flurry of increased U.S. media attention, including a splashy Vanity Fair   profile of Fajardo. Consequently, some have deemed Berlinger's film a touch crude itself in its essentially uncritical view of this showy sort of celebrity consciousness-raising. But whatever one thinks of the beautiful people, the third-world children they adopt, and the noble causes they support, Crude  shows how celebrities can and do make things happen in the political sphere—and how, in an age when President Obama 's shirtless torso is as much a tabloid staple as Zac Efron 's, resistance may be futile.
