If you want to know whether you can still laugh while your mouth is dropping open in shock, then you won't want to miss the disturbingly hilarious mock documentary C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America . It's a fearless and brilliant racial-historical satire, done in a meticulous re-creation of the Ken Burns mode, that chronicles the last 150 years of America as if the South had won the Civil War. That's right: Jefferson Davis gets elected president, Lincoln escapes in blackface with the aid of Harriet Tubman (''We both n-----s now, Mr. President!''), and slavery is established throughout the land. The writer-director, Kevin Willmott, works with a scandalous daring matched by his dexterous manipulation of archival reality. He mixes photographs and films, historical figures actual and fake, plus talking heads and sick-joke racist commercials until fact and fiction eerily merge.
A snippet from a D.W. Griffith film depicting Lincoln's capture is tastelessly funny, but later, an ''actual'' 1905 clip of the forgotten former president has a haunting plausibility. C.S.A. , like Philip Roth's The Plot Against America , is a dense counterhistory that ingeniously undermines your disbelief. As the Confederate States turns into a domesticated haven of white supremacy, even signing a truce with Hitler during World War II, the movie gets you to think, Could this actually have happened? The audacious upshot of C.S.A.  is that in a place with the still-thriving racial demons of America, it sort of did.

Satire via sledgehammer, Kevin Willmott's fake documentary about an alternative American history, "CSA: The Confederate States of America," opens with a quotation attributed to George Bernard Shaw. "If you're going to tell people the truth, you better make them laugh; otherwise they'll kill you." Another version of that same quotation opens Wesley Brown's novel "Darktown Strutters," an exploration of minstrelsy and identity hinged to a 19th-century Kentucky slave named Jim Crow who becomes a dancer in an all-white show. Mr. Brown ends the Shaw quotation with the admonition "make them laugh"; for his part, Mr. Willmott keeps the threat intact, which warns of a far heavier hand at work. Taking the form of a British documentary, produced by the familiar-sounding British Broadcasting Service and narrated by one of those insufferable know-it-all twittering voices, the film purports to tell the history of the Confederate States of America, starting around the period of Ulysses S. Grant's famous face-to-face with Robert E. Lee. This time, though, it's Grant who surrenders to Lee, allowing the South to rise permanently again and create a parallel America that at times deviates wildly from the historical record and, at other times, bears an uncomfortable resemblance to the world we know. As the Confederate flag waves, Lincoln dies of old age and D. W. Griffith makes a movie ("The Hunt for Dishonest Abe") about the disgraced president's escape attempt by Underground Railroad and the good graces of a doomed Harriet Tubman. And so it goes: history repeats itself, this time as farce. As the years pass, more slowly than necessary, Reconstruction gives way to the Depression and beyond amid a flurry of faked and authentic documentary and entertainment bits. Talking heads fill in the supposed blanks as do the copious phony commercials that break up the slow march of time. Although Mr. Willmott's approximation of both Griffith and classical Hollywood leaves much to be desired, he does a credible job of miming the hard sell of cheap television advertising. Most of the commercials are too on the nose to be really funny, though an ad for a series called "Runaways," clearly modeled on the reality show "Cops," elicits a pained laugh because it gets at the original's inherent racism with such ease. "CSA: The Confederate States of America" is being presented by Spike Lee and, in many respects, feels like a companion piece to "Bamboozled," his 2000 satire about a black minstrel television show. Like Mr. Lee's hit-and-miss effort, Mr. Willmott's alternative history takes its inspiration and its rage from an America that has come both a long way and not nearly far enough. But while the filmmaker's anger is palpable it's not very inspired. (Riffing off such exhausted conceits as fake documentaries and commercials doesn't help.) Unlike Philip K. Dick's 1962 novel "The Man in the High Castle" and Philip Roth's 2004 novel "The Plot Against America," both of which envision a terrifyingly different course for World War II, Mr. Willmott's film rises to the bait but not the challenge.

A faux Ken Burns-style documentary recounting the last 140 years of American history as if the South had won the Civil War, "C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America" is more intriguing on paper than when it actually unspools onscreen. Kevin Willmott's small-scaled but ambitious picture is well-researched, sometimes amusing and not unintelligent. Still, the laudably provocative impulse behind the project never busts loose into incendiary or subversive outrageousness due to a combination of historical fastidiousness, lack of stylistic bravado and an ever-growing feeling that the premise is played out well before the finale. After fest play, an enterprising distrib could chalk up some limited mileage theatrically, but most promising markets loom in cable and homevid.
Willmott, an assistant professor at the U. of Kansas who wrote and co-directed the 1999 vid-released feature "Ninth Street," displays his academic erudition throughout, from the way he deals with grand historical matters to his archival use of actual products like Darky Toothpaste and Sambo Axle Grease.
Unfortunately, his adherence to real history quickly straitjackets the narrative, as it forces the film to pretend that American and world history would have unfolded in much the same way had the Confederacy prevailed. The non-viability of this approach fatally hits home once the chronology reaches the post-World War II era and Willmott tries to square such events as the JFK assassination, Vietnam, the Watts riots, etc., with the continued existence of the Confederate States. It just doesn't wash.
Partly for this reason, pic's early stretch is easily the most successful. Positioned as a history of the C.S.A. as reported by the British Broadcasting Service, pic recounts how French and British troops joined Robert E. Lee at Gettysburg to rout the North and force the Yankees' surrender on April 9, 1864. A deftly rendered mock-D.W. Griffith short entitled "The Hunt for Dishonest Abe" helps recount how, with the help of Harriet Tubman, the defeated President Lincoln attempted to flee in blackface before being arrested, imprisoned and ultimately exiled to Canada, where he languished in disgrace prior to a final filmed "interview" in 1905.
Meanwhile, the nation goes through a Reconstruction in which slavery is introduced in the North, "Dixie" becomes the national anthem, New York City and Boston burn, Asians are made slaves along with blacks and Jews are put on a reservation on Long Island. Info is conveyed not only in usual combo of stills and narration, but via additional "fictional" creations, such as excerpts from "The Jefferson Davis Story" (RKO, 1946) and "I Married an Abolitionist" (1955), might-have-been TV shows ("Leave It to Beulah") and commercials for the likes of "Coon Chicken Inn" and "Niggerhair" cigarettes (actual products through the '50s, per Willmott).
Some of the wittiest material posits Canada as a haven for anti-slavery proponents. Many eminent Americans, including Mark Twain, Susan B. Anthony and Ralph Waldo Emerson, move north, many Negroes exile themselves there and the "Cotton Curtain" is constructed along the two countries' massive border.
Meanwhile, the Confederacy pursues its ambition of a "tropical empire" by spreading its ideology into Mexico and South America, then pursues world domination via a World War II alliance with Hitler, who is seen visiting the White House.
As the narrative crumbles nonsensically thereafter, Willmott turns to mock TV shows and commercials to pad out the remaining running time, and climax turns on a "revelation" that scarcely seems far-fetched after the recent Strom Thurmond incident.
Willmott offers up quite a few pointed ideas and imaginative flights of fancy that succeed, up to a point, in removing the insulation from the kind of race talk that most people avoid for one reason or another. But pic sorely needed an anarchic spirit and irreverent humor to provide both the hilarity and the discomfiture to make it really connect with audiences.
Despite the inspiration provided by Ken Burns, aesthetic approach is at once zippier and less elegant than Burns' own. Pic was made on modest means almost entirely in Kansas.
Camera (color/B&W; video; 1.33 aspect ratio), Matthew Jacobson; editors, David Gramly, Sean Blake; music, Kelly Werts; production designer, Scott Murry; sound, Mark Bovos, Rich Stobaugh, Robert Sokol; associate producers, Ollie Hall, Kerwin Looney; assistant directors, Timothy Rebman, Blake; additional camera, Tim De Paepe, Mike Gunter, Niki Newland, Troy Paddock, Fred Paddock, Roland Schlotzhauer; casting, Wright/Laird Casting. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (American Spectrum), Jan. 18, 2004. Running time: 89 MIN.

 


Night Watch , the occult thriller that shattered box office records when it was released in Russia during the summer of 2004, not only represents an alternate universe—it is one. As directed, from Sergei Lukyanenko 's bestseller, by Kazakhstan -born TV commercial/music video whiz Timur Bekmambetov , the no longer extant Evil Empire reimagines itself.
Cold War evaporated, the Manichean struggle between the forces of light and darkness is waged—often invisibly—on Moscow 's streets and subways, and on the roofs of suburban housing projects. Bureaucracy has become metaphysical. Mysterious "others" live among us, issuing licenses for other others to operate as vampires. The forces of light even make their headquarters in the Moscow equivalent of the Con Ed  power station on East 14th Street; their leader is played by Vladimir Menshov , director of the Brezhnev-era blockbuster Moscow Does Not Believe in  Tears . No more Communism, boo-fricking-hoo. Night Watch  goes to considerable pains to demonstrate that opting for darkness or light is a matter of free will—the deal sealed with a blood-and-vodka cocktail, hold the Worcestershire sauce.
The left's been Left Behind: Powerful forces subject to arcane rules of engagement struggle to possess the soul of a child born in 1992, year one of the post–Soviet Union . A witch—with a Party card?—had tried to abort this future Great One, and he's grown up neglected. For much of the movie, the kid is in a trance—telepathically summoned to his doom by a lonely vampire girl, perhaps under the influence of the oligarki . (In his normal state, the lad sits in his single mother's bleak high-rise apartment, mind colonized by the WB, as he watches Buffy  on TV.) Intermittently, the nominal protagonist—a flashlight-wielding hero of the "night watch" played by matinee idol Konstantin Khabensky —plunges into a morass known as the Gloom to further battle the dark side.
Despite its cheesy blood and thunder and ludicrous "Sunshine Makers" metaphysics, this is the funniest apocalypse I've seen since George Romero's  Land of the Dead . (Bekmambetov is even a protégé of Roger Corman , who executive-produced his last movie, the English-language Arena .) Night Watch  thrives on coarse, sardonic humor, with many of the performers acting around the script. Bekmambetov's bombastic special effects have a distinctive sense of decomposing glitz; as an action director he favors a distinctive start-stop rhythm. His movie is a creature with a Cookie Monster voice and a Frankenstein gait, jolting itself along with intermittent blasts of metallisti  music and a sizzling sense of self-administered electroshock treatment.
No hyper-designed ersatz futurism for Bekmambetov. Night Watch  is knowingly frugal and proudly cruddy. The veneer of digital vortex whirlpools, visible nervous systems, cosmic video gamers, and secret-agent pop stars notwithstanding, the movie unfolds in an essentially shabby world. (This is the sort of vampire flick that Charles Bukowski  might have hallucinated in a skid-row blood bank.) The Night Watch  men have kvass  in their veins; the movie's sour lysergic feel trumps all digital manipulation. Indeed, the most striking effect is the pervasive atmosphere of misery, damp cold, squalid apartments, starving pensioners, power failures, snarled traffic, public drunkenness, and bad weather.
In its way, Night Watch  is the sci-fi spawn of The Master and Margarita , the great underground novel of the 1930s era in which Satan and his familiars tour Stalin's Moscow. Truly, our former Soviet friends have a rich history of irrationality from which to draw. (Bekmambetov, son of a never Christianized land, has called his movie "shamanistic filmmaking.") To see Night Watch , you'd think Russia had never left the Middle Ages—but in that, of course, it's hardly alone.

Sober science fiction, Kevin Willmott 's mockumentary CSA: Confederate States of America  posits a parallel world in which the South won the Civil War. No allegory here: CSA  takes the sober form of a British documentary broadcast on Confederate Television, interspersed with ads for Confederate Insurance , radio-controlled shackles, and Niggerhair cigarettes.
One can only imagine what SCTV  in its prime might have done with this conceit—especially since, in CSA 's alternate universe, "red" Canada has become a black Zion, as well as the cradle of all positive American culture from Mark Twain  to Elvis Presley . Actually, CSA  takes off on Ken Burns 's The Civil War , and Willmott has the visual rhetoric down—if not the maudlin music and lugubrious readings. Willmott is obviously a student of the medium. In addition to talking heads and scanned documents, his compilation includes fake education films, a faux D.W. Griffith  two-reeler ( The Hunt for Dishonest Abe  , with the fugitive president disguised in blackface), and a late-'40s thriller, I Married an Abolitionist. As counterfactual history, CSA  is more detached than something like Philip Roth 's The Plot Against America . Willmott, who has written numerous documentaries and is a professor of film studies at the University of Kansas , maps an initially plausible trajectory (and even postscripts his movie with footnotes). Having convinced Britain and France that it is fighting for freedom and not for slavery, the Confederacy enlists powerful allies and routs the Union—then moves south to establish the equivalent of a Latin American co-prosperity sphere. Meanwhile, the North is wooed back into the fold with tax rebates for businesses buying slaves. Willmott's imagined 20th century is even more polemical. To cure the Great Depression, the CSA revives the slave trade, allies itself with Nazi Germany , and launches a sneak attack on Japan .
