
"CSNY Déjà Vu" may come as a big, spiky surprise to some fans of Crosby, Stills, Nash, and Young, much as the group's "Freedom of Speech" tour did in 2006. Instead of the warmed-over hippie nostalgia that comes from hearing four men well into their 60s warble "Helplessly Hoping" for the 4,673d time, the film, like the tour it documents, wallops you in the face with politics.
Well, good for CSNY - let it be duly noted that paying $300 a ticket does not necessarily mean a band has to meet your expectations or complacencies. (In other words, you pays your money and you takes your chances.) But because the film has a lot on its mind - the war in Iraq, the 1960s, modern-day activism, veterans' affairs, screaming guitar solos - "Déjà Vu" is as scattershot as it is ornery and cheering. Fittingly, the director is named Bernard Shakey, who any old patchouli head will tell you is really Neil Young.
Young was always the anarchist sparkplug of the group and probably its brains too - the rise in energy from 1969's "Crosby, Stills, & Nash" to 1970's "Déjà Vu" remains electrifying. In 2006, he had just recorded an album called "Living With War" whose first single was an in-your-face jeremiad titled "Let's Impeach the President," just in case you weren't sure where Neil stood on the matter. He then convinced the other three performers to turn the CSNY tour into a piece of rolling agitprop theater.
"It's a dictatorship, but it's a benevolent dictatorship," David Crosby says in the film. "Neil is in charge. He just thinks about this stuff all the time."
Young hired journalist Michael Cerre - a Vietnam vet who was embedded in the Iraq invasion for ABC News - to help structure the film and take cameras into the stands during the concerts. The results, especially in the red states, are choice.
When the band lays into "Let's Impeach the President" in Atlanta, grown men curse and storm the exits while college girls whimper that it's all "too political." The drama and high comedy of "Déjà Vu" lies in the collision of CSNY's boomer audience - who only want to be reminded of their youthful activism - with the band's unyielding insistence on the here and now. But why get involved when you can just sing along with "Ohio" again?
There's an entire movie to be made about such pop-cult hypocrisy (or, at the very least, about some concertgoers' unwillingness to do their homework beforehand), but Young wants more. The last half of "Déjà Vu" is largely devoted to those who've fought in Iraq and returned to fight against our presence there: congressional candidates, Gold Star mothers, a folk singer named Josh Hisle seen playing his song "A Traitor's Death" over there and back here.
These people and their efforts are as admirable as the film surrounding them is unfocused. Young wants to provide positive examples rather than lecture, but the devil in him can't resist poking those who think otherwise for the noisy feedback they provide while ignoring the group's own blind spots. (Where do the tour profits go? Veterans organizations? Crosby's health care?)
Young has always been a magpie, an intuitive collagist rather than a linear thinker, and it has served him well as a musician. Less so as a filmmaker. "CSNY Déjà Vu" is trenchant and inspiring in its broad outlines and sloppy in the details. (Minor point: the Boston Globe music critic, who's quoted in the film, is named Joan Anderman, not Anderson.) The movie makes you glad that CSNY is still out there rocking in the free world. It makes you doubly glad they're not leading it.

 “CSNY: Déjà Vu,” Neil Young’s film about a Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young concert tour in 2006, has some delicious moments, but  you never quite shake the feeling  that it’s documenting a tempest in a teapot.  The band was responsible for some of rock’s most confrontational songs in the Vietnam era, including “Ohio,” about the Kent State shootings in 1970, and two years ago Mr. Young (who directs here under his whimsical alias, Bernard Shakey) went back on the road with Stephen Stills, Graham Nash and David Crosby with some new tunes about Iraq.  The film tries to play up the mixed reaction engendered by songs like “Let’s Impeach the President,” and there is one interesting scene of people walking out of a concert in Atlanta because of the show’s political tone. But mostly the movie feels like manufactured controversy. In trying to draw parallels to the atmosphere of the 1960s and ’70s it only underscores just how long ago it was that music had the power to shape and focus the public debate.  So that leaves this a film you watch for the small moments. The man-on-the-street comments captured by Mr. Young and Mike Cerre, a journalist who joined the project, are priceless Americana. And one juxtaposition — the band performs the anthem “For What It’s Worth,” then the film cuts to a nutty appearance by Mr. Young on “The Colbert Report” — is particularly sweet.  “CSNY: Déjà Vu” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has some strong language and brief war images.

Making music, making fun of themselves and making as much political hay as possible, Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young set out to alleviate the public allergy to Iraq War films with "CSNY Deja Vu," a doc that seems quite likely to effect a cure. Helmer Bernard Shakey -- a.k.a. Neil Young -- has constructed a chronicle of his old band's "Freedom of Speech" tour of summer '06 and come up with an aud-friendly, activist musical that seems sure to raise both political ire and major bucks.
Thanks to his proclivities for grunge, his political instincts and a timeless fashion sense, Young has never been locked into any particular era or demographic. Similarly, his drollery makes him ageless: From the first shot of an open highway, obscured by the band bus's window frame, to the citations from critics assailing the band for its left-leaning decreptitude, nothing is taken too seriously.
Except the war. Which is front and center.
The entire movie is a provocation; for one thing, it's not strictly a concert film, which was how it appeared to be advertised, at least at Sundance. There is plenty of music -- the band, whose intonation has always been a crapshoot in live performance, sounds fairly angelic. But digressions abound: history lessons, Iraq war veterans and the contributions of reporter Mike Cerre (who, unfortunately for the film, sounds a bit too much like sports announcer Jim Lampley), keep the war issue in the audience's face.
And aud's can rebel, as seen during a CSNY stop in Atlanta, where a small uprising breaks out over an anti-Bush song ("Let's impeach the president for lying ... ," the band sings). Some concertgoers react with boos, walkouts, a storm of vitriol and vulgarity. They flip off the camera. "How dare they!" is the reaction by some less-than-articulate Atlantans. Given that this was the "Freedom of Speech" tour -- and was at least partly promoting Young's "Living With War" CD --one wonders what such concertgoers expected when they decided to attend. (Of course, Young would likely say that people who don't know or care what their government is doing probably can't be expected to know what a rock concert is going to be about.)
Throughout the film, a sense of, yes, deja vu abounds: CSNY provided much of the soundtrack for the antiwar movement of the Vietnam era, and four decades later, they're doing it again. As Stephen Colbert asks Young during a "Colbert Report" appearance, why doesn't he let someone else have this war? "I tried," he says, the very unsubtle point of the film being that this war's generation should grab the baton of resistance and start running with it.
The music, coincidentally, is a mix of CSNY standards and the newer Young material, with the occasional startling guitar solo from Stephen Stills and cohesive playing by the quartet. They certainly know the material. And so do we.
Production values, especially Mike Elwell's shooting, are tops.


Neil Young  wanted to tour the country that re-elected George W. Bush , dole out some demerits, light some fires, and maybe even sell a few copies of his 2006 album, Living With War . So he convinced his former bandmates, David Crosby , Stephen Stills , and Graham Nash , to join him, and brought journalist Mike Cerre  along to canvas the crowds, along with Iraq  and Vietnam  vets, about the ongoing war. Directed by Young (credited as Bernard Shakey ), CSNY: Déjà Vu  presents the foursome's summer of dove (though the hatchets buried between them seem to have shallow graves) as part tour documentary, part polemic for-and-by-the-people. Initially erring a little too far on the side of the former, the film's mishmash of news footage and concert reviews threatens to devolve into a CSNY wank-fest, but when the tour hits Georgia—and Georgia hits back—the power of a brazen anthem puts the focus squarely on the audience. The crowd stampeding for the doors in a hail of red-faced bird-flipping (apparently "Let's Impeach the President" is not a local favorite) is not the kind of march Young had in mind. But the house band for countless Vietnam protests sees an equal problem in preaching to the choir: Exchanging righteous vibes makes for a nice evening out, but, as Nash points out, ain't no thing until the choir gets off its ass.
