
They've drafted the B team for "Daddy Day Camp," a belated sequel to the rambunctious 2003 family comedy "Daddy Day Care." Now batting for the original film's Eddie Murphy is Cuba Gooding Jr., who sinks lower with each new movie yet never stops smiling. In place of "Curb Your Enthusiasm" costar Jeff Garlin as the hero's corpulent buddy is generic big guy Paul Rae; subbing for Regina King as the hero's beleaguered wife is Tamala Jones ("Next Friday").
All the poop jokes are back, though. Broad, good-natured, and obsessed with everything in the human body that must come out, "Daddy Day Camp" is innocuous amusement for 5- to 8-year-olds and other people stuck in the anal stage of development.
Gooding's Charlie Hinton and Rae's Phil Ryerson have been so successful in their day-care business that they decide to expand the brand, buying the summer camp they attended as kids. The place is a wreck, the bank's ready to foreclose, and the smug owner (Lochlyn Munro) of richie-rich Camp Canola next door wants to buy Camp Driftwood out. There's a "methane problem" in the outhouse, too, and I think it leaked onto the script.
Having absorbed movies like "Meatballs" and "The Bad News Bears" at a cellular level, the five screenwriters give Charlie and Phil the standard mixed bag of campers: the Thug, the Nerd, the Know-It-All, the Kid Who Pukes on Everything. All of them talk like miniature 40-year-olds and each has one big problem that will be solved by the end credits.
Charlie's big problem is that he's a modern Family-Movie Dad: a castrated weenie whose son (Spencir Bridges) looks at him with pity and contempt. Time to call in the Marines in the person of Charlie's own father, retired Colonel Buck Hinton (Richard Gant), who whips the little snots into military formation. Goes one marching chant, "G.I. Joe is turning blue/There are peanuts in his poo."
Just when "Daddy Day Camp" is beginning to look like a Defense Department recruitment ad, the movie makes the case for Charlie's style of paternal loving-kindness. It's an impressive contortion act that supports whichever approach, tough-love or coddling, suits your personal fancy.
Not that kiddie audiences will care when they've got this much flatulence, projectile vomiting, and pee-filled water balloons to keep them occupied. "Daddy Day Camp" knows that gross-out gags are a staple of elementary school comedy, and it doesn't care what mom and dad think. If the movie is relentless low-brow swill, its splattery good cheer makes it hard to hate. Just go in expecting the expected, and maybe bring a tarp.


Because he's an Oscar winner with a rep now for headlining turkeys, watching Cuba Gooding Jr. in trash like Daddy Day Camp  almost hurts. At this point, you just feel so bad  for him. Filling in for Eddie Murphy in a septically humored kiddie sequel to Daddy Day Care , Gooding gives a mug-job performance that consists mainly of reacting (again and again) to nasty smells. Fred Savage of The Wonder Years  directs, and it also stings to think of little Kevin Arnold reduced to pantsing his actors from behind the camera for a laugh that never comes.

 This slapdash sequel to “Daddy Day Care” finds its hero, Charlie Hinton (Cuba Gooding Jr., replacing the original film’s star, Eddie Murphy), taking over Camp Driftwood, the ramshackle day camp he attended as a boy. He hopes to expand his business; bond with his overprotected son, Ben (Spencir Bridges); and avenge an ancient humiliation by his childhood nemesis, Lance Warner (Lochlyn Munro), a rich swine who attended a rival day camp and now owns it.  Aghast at Lance’s guerrilla-style hazing of Charlie’s charges and Camp Driftwood’s decay (the methane-leaking bathroom hut passes gas by itself), Charlie reaches out to his father, Col. Buck Hinton of the Marines (Richard Gant), a hard case who Charlie says specialized in “anger, shaming and criticism.”  Buck leads Charlie’s campers on forced marches and insurgent-style raids against Lance’s minions, and instills a stoic spirit that has been synonymous with heroism since Achilles was in diapers.  Of course the children adore Buck — particularly Ben, who craves a father figure who doesn’t shriek like an old lady. Mr. Gant’s charming characterization — Norman Schwarzkopf by way of Captain Kangaroo — is syrup poured atop a heaping helping of warrior-jock worship.  Like “The Pacifier” and “Transformers,” “Daddy Day Camp” (directed by Fred Savage of “Wonder Years” fame) is a recruiting poster for kids, insisting that there’s no domestic problem that military values can’t solve.  “Daddy Day Camp” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has slapstick violence, mild profanity and bathroom humor.

Some former child stars have been known to overdose on drugs, get busted for carrying guns, pose nude for Playboy and appear on late-night infomercials. Fred Savage has directed "Daddy Day Camp." As helmed by the onetime "Wonder Years" thesp and first-time filmmaker, this sequel to the 2003 Eddie Murphy comedy may appeal to auds still young enough not to have seen it all before, or who still find flatulence hilarious, or who think adults, when agitated, flail about like epileptic marionettes.
More discerning auds may find the hyperactive tone of this dysfunctional family comedy a bit hard to swallow. Having succeeded at running their home-based day care center, Charlie Hinton (Cuba Gooding Jr.) and partner Phil Ryerson (Paul Rae) start up a dilapidated day camp -- largely because Charlie wants revenge after the childhood trauma of being humiliated at the 1977 Summer Camp Olympiad by Lance Warner (Lochlyn Munro), who's now the head of rival Camp Canola. The dump Charlie and Phil buy, Camp Driftwood, is a long-neglected health-department violation with a methane problem in the outhouse. You find yourself counting the seconds until it blows up. You don't wait long.
Much of the humor revolves around bodily functions and feral children. Vomiting. Bed-wetting. Exploding outhouses. When someone actually uses a toilet, the film feels as though it's moved uptown.
After an initial surge in campers and then a dropoff following an initial series of catastrophes, Charlie and Phil are left with a hardcore group whose parents, one must conclude, are negligent, ill or imprisoned. There's the belligerent fat kid; the tiny, oh-so-articulate girl; the hillbilly felon-to-be with a mullet; the delicate boy who, when he throws up, manages to do it on someone's shoes or sleeping bag.
And there's Charlie's son, Ben (Spencir Bridges), an uncertain little camper who will eventually find himself -- thanks to his dad and his martinet of a grandfather, Buck (Richard Gant). Dad and Grandpa, lifelong antagonists, will eventually meet in a middle ground between wimpdom and the Marine Corps.
"Daddy Day Camp" suffers all the near-classic sequel handicaps: an all-new cast lacking whatever celebrity luster was embodied by the first; a story that essentially recycles the original's sitcomish elements; a director getting his feet wet in features (Savage has done a lot of TV, which is what this feels like); and the general sense that no one was really in it for anything but a quick payday.
Production values are adequate, except for that outhouse explosion, which may have been an outtake from "Pearl Harbor."
