Dare , a sweetly sexed-up high school triangle movie, is like a John Hughes comedy trying to pass itself off as ''transgressive.'' To feed her art, Alexa (Emmy Rossum), an overachieving good-girl actress, transforms herself overnight into a lusty siren; Ben (Ashley Springer), her shy, gay loner of a best friend, undergoes just as quick an image makeover, shucking his outcast blues by coming out; and Johnny (Zach Gilford), the school's alienated James Dean, is the love object they both seduce. The actors, all great camera subjects, help give director Adam Salky's overly pat movie a trace of confessional conviction.


 “Dare,” written by David Brind, directed by Adam Salky and based on their short film of the same title, stakes out familiar territory and, true to its name, strikes out in some risky new directions. This high school semi-romance, which blends comic and tearful moods, is at once more provocative and more contemplative than most of its big-screen counterparts. On television and in young-adult novels, candor —  or prurience —  about teenage behavior is the norm, but Hollywood movies tend to keep one foot firmly planted in a more innocent world.  Alexa (Emmy Rossum), at least at first, seems to embody an established teen-comedy archetype. She is a modest dresser, a diligent student and generally a cautious, sensible college-track soul. She’s also the star of her drama class, but her interest in acting may have more to do with academic ambition than with creative passion. That, at least, is what she hears from an alumnus of her school, now a successful stage actor (slyly played by Alan Cumming), when he returns to his alma mater to give a master class.  Though Alexa desperately wants to impress this visitor, he is transfixed by Johnny (Zach Gilford), her scene partner, a lazy and distracted student with no apparent interest in acting at all. Johnny does, however, have brooding good looks and a languorous sexuality that might be called Brandoesque. (The scene he and Alexa have prepared is from “A Streetcar Named Desire.”)  And so, at a party she hadn’t planned on attending, Alexa throws herself at Johnny, relieving herself of her virginity in an act of calculated recklessness. Her best friend, a timid, sexually confused nerd named Ben (Ashley Springer), follows suit, and a wobbly bisexual triangle takes shape.  As it develops, “Dare” lays out some interesting psychological puzzles, though the filmmakers lack the technique to explore them as thoroughly as you might wish. The film’s tone falters at times but nonetheless remains focused on intriguing questions about the nature of social and erotic power. Most interesting is the way the perspective shifts, so that Alexa and Ben, who start out as misfits in thrall to Johnny’s charisma, end up using him for their own purposes, even as his vulnerability becomes increasingly apparent.  Ms. Rossum, Mr. Gilford and Mr. Springer handle this material a bit more deftly than the director does and keep the movie engaging even when it slips and wanders. “Dare” feels a bit unfinished, at once overreaching and underrealized. But there is a lot of intelligence, and considerable daring, in the basic conceit. You might say that Mr. Salky and Mr. Brind have tried to combine John Hughes with Rainer Werner Fassbinder, an effort that is much less crazy, and far more persuasive, than it might sound.  “Dare” is rated R. It has sexual situations involving teenagers.

Essentially the anti-"High School Musical," "Dare" rejects the notion of senior year as a time when greeting-card emotions come true, portraying it instead as a randy petri dish for sexual experimentation. Focusing on three drama students who do a bit too much extracurricular bonding, this "Cruel Intentions"-style cesspool of teenage hanky-panky may be more scandalous than its chaste Disney counterpart, but that doesn't necessarily make it any more authentic. Expanded from director Adam Salky's gay sexual-awakening short of the same name, "Dare" looks positioned for a similar fate: a healthy festival life followed by limited commercial exposure.
In keeping with its title, "Dare" encourages viewers to reach beyond their comfort zone and experience life, but it interprets that challenge in purely sexual terms. Screenwriter David Brind divides the film into three sections, each one concentrating on a different member of the school's drama class.
First up, Alexa Walker ("The Phantom of the Opera's" Emmy Rossum) is the goody-goody type, succeeding at everything she tries. Her spirits are crushed when a special guest (Alan Cumming, playing a local actor) critiques her performance in the school play. "Do something you're afraid of and fail," he advises, which inspires her to seduce the class bad boy, Johnny Drake ("Friday Night Lights" jock Zach Gilford), unlocking the sizzle that was missing from their performance of "A Streetcar Named Desire."
Alexa's story could work as a stand-alone short, but the pic complicates things with the next segment, focusing on her best friend Ben (Ashley Springer). The drama class' "light boy," Ben is too shy to go onstage, but seizes his opportunity when he and Johnny are drinking champagne beside Johnny's pool. "I had my first kiss tonight," he later tells Alexa. "I also gave my first blow job."
In the final chapter, "Dare" tries to imagine the inner life of the school stud. As if exacting their revenge on the cool kids from their own adolescence, Salky and Brind paint Johnny as insecure and vulnerable. After objectifying him for most of the movie, "Dare" shows the climactic threesome through Johnny's uncomfortable eyes.
Pic's unusual structure has an unfortunate side effect in that the characters cease to develop after their segments end, so auds get an incredibly complex sense of Johnny's character, while Alexa and Ben seem underwritten. Switching his shooting style with each segment, Salky abandons the bright, conventional style of Alexa's overlong portion for longer takes and artier framing when Ben takes over, before finally going handheld and draining much of the color for the Johnny section.
Though minor arcs play out in each piece, "Dare" lacks an overarching narrative to propel the entire film, so overall pacing feels uneven and long at just 90 minutes.

In the high school world of Dare , the theater-geek turns out to be kinky, the asshole cool-kid reveals great reservoirs of sensitivity, and the maladjusted gay teen is, well, pretty much just a maladjusted gay teen. This last figure aside, unexpected character arcs are the order of the day in Adam Salky 's stilted drama, though the film's tripartite structure, which fatally divvies up its already limited screen time between its central trio, ensures that these character's quick-change acts register as little more than the dramatically implausible contrivances they so clearly are. The least credible of these transformations finds prudish drama girl Alexa seducing her hunky Streetcar Named Desire  co-star, Johnny, in an ultimate bit of method preparation. From here, the film turns into a romantic roundelay, with Alexa and her childhood best bud, Ben, hot to fuck Johnny, who views both as just friends—surrogates (groan) for his absent family. Johnny's confusion (unlike that of his lovers) is at least vaguely convincing, but Zach Gilford 's game performance is still no match for the film's catalog of easy ironies, awkward framings, and advice on how to play Blanche DuBois  cribbed from season 4, episode 2 of The Simpsons .
