
''Dark Water" is a horror movie that's best enjoyed -- or at least heeded -- as a cautionary tale about the pitfalls of apartment rental. Directed by Brazil's Walter Salles, it's a remake of Hideo Nakata's 2002 freak-out, and until it sputters to a nonsensical close, the film is a spooky entertainment.
The finale is disappointing given how mightily Salles handles most of the material in Rafael Yglesias's script. Salles is the sensual humanist behind ''Central Station" and ''The Motorcycle Diaries," and he's probably among the last people you'd expect to make a movie adapted from a picture by Nakata, the man who also made the original ''Ring" flicks. But his first Hollywood assignment is not as weird a match for his emotional sensibility as it appears.
Dahlia (Jennifer Connelly) is looking for a new place to live with her 5-year-old daughter Cecilia (Ariel Gade), as she braces herself for a custody battle with her belligerent, soon-to-be-ex husband, Kyle (Dougray Scott). Desperate to find something affordable, she takes a place on Roosevelt Island, that sliver of land with the notorious prison back story that's just a finger snap away from Manhattan.
On the tram over to the island, Cecilia worries that the island is less exciting than the city. Actually, it's presented rather strikingly as a towering concrete jungle, which Dahlia likens to a small town. She's found a vacant one-bedroom in a dank Brutalist complex, where the movie serves up two big treats: John C. Reilly as Mr. Murray, the blithe but shady building manager, and Pete Postlethwaite as Veeck, the terse maintenance chief with a vague accent. (Tim Roth, as Dahlia's lawyer, is waiting in the movie's second half.)
Between Postlethwaite's brusque demeanor and Reilly's jaunty but scary tour (''You can smell the river. Can you smell it?"), most people would run screaming from the unit. But in a moment that sort of breaks your heart, Dahlia takes it, mostly at the urging of her daughter, whose disdainful attitude toward the place reverses once she wanders up to the roof and finds an abandoned backpack, which she'll spend the rest of the picture coveting.
The building has other deterrents. The elevator seems to have a mind of its own. The walls are surprisingly thin. The faucets spew hair. And in a corner of the bedroom Dahlia and Cecilia share, there is a stain that looks like a burn from a very large cigarette. It drips an unexplained and possibly unsanitary coffee-colored liquid. Both Murray and Veeck give Dahlia the runaround about fixing it.
Along with the leak, Dahlia also has to deal with Cecilia's acquisition of an imaginary friend named Natasha and the possibility that her husband is trying to exploit her already fragile mental state (she was neglected as a child) so he can seem the fitter parent. Had ''Dark Water" stopped here and gone in some other direction, the movie could have been a hauntingly atmospheric portrait of a woman's gradual psychological collapse.
Heaven knows Connelly is up to the task. The teary emoting she does can sometimes come at the expense of her characters, as was the case in her last real-estate nightmare, ''The House of Sand and Fog." But she's in sharp form here, not allowing the character's patience and maternal strength to eclipse her common sense. Dahlia affords Connelly her best and most believable performance.
Sadly, she's shortchanged by a movie whose dramatic strengths are hamstrung by its ridiculous obligations to the original.
There are bizarre floods in Dahlia's bathroom, a thankless trip to the top of the building's water tower, and silly scenes with a dead girl who looks a lot like Dahlia when she was young. Too many questions leave us asking questions. And there's a pitiful lack of fright: All the suspense is easily shrugged off in the last 20 minutes.
Still, 
aided by Daniel Rezende's crisp editing, Affonso Beato's handsome photography, and Therese DePrez's evocatively dismal production design, Salles is able to tease out the fraught family drama that lurks in Nakata's films. And as long as the movie is in step with Connelly's aching heroine and not trying to scare our socks off, "Dark Water" is of a piece with Salles's sensitive filmmaking. Obviously, from a genre standpoint, that presents a tremendous problem. Nobody goes to a horror movie for a good cry.

         In the case to persuade Hollywood studios to engage real directors more often, not just for their awards fodder, add "Dark Water" as Exhibit B, right after Christopher Nolan's "Batman Begins." Brazilian Walter Salles, who previously directed the Oscar-nominated films "Central Station" and "The Motorcycle Diaries," guides this stylish remake through treacherous territory to create a distressing, subtly suspenseful film full of emotional resonance.
 
  Like "Batman Begins," "Dark Water" places a priority on character development and shuns the GameBoy/PlayStation pacing that plagues a lot of new movies. Salles walks a tightrope, balancing a serious, dramatic narrative involving a nasty custody case with anxiety-inducing themes. Right behind him on that tightrope is star Jennifer Connelly, whose nuanced performance never condescends to the genre and takes the audience along with her right to the edge.
 


         






    Adapting the Japanese novel and film by the author and director of "The Ring," Salles and screenwriter Rafael Yglesias craftily reset "Dark Water" on New York City's Roosevelt Island, the long, narrow strip of land in the middle of the East River. The claustrophobic locale, soaked with rain and permeated with a sense of alienation, makes for a perfect environment to brew an intelligent, well-crafted thriller.
 
  Connelly plays Dahlia Williams, a newly single mom struggling to find affordable housing for her and her 6-year-old daughter, Ceci (Ariel Gade). On the island, they find a place, liberally described as a two-bedroom, in a dank, deteriorating apartment building. Murray, the huckster building manager, played with smarmy zeal by John C. Reilly, assures Dahlia that a new coat of paint and other improvements will brighten up the creepy lobby and sinister ambience.
 
  A furtive trip to the rooftop wins over an initially skeptical Ceci, and Dahlia's desperation to appease her daughter, coupled with Murray's snake-oil salesmanship, has them swiftly moving into apartment 9F, against the wishes of Dahlia's ex-husband, Kyle (Dougray Scott). Before long, a foreboding spot on the ceiling gives way to an oozing liquid the color of French roast, and Dahlia is enmeshed in renter's hell.
 
  Described by Murray as having been built during the 1970s in "the Brutalist style," the building exhibits that approach's devotion to raw concrete and blockish, geometric shapes, spiked with Gothic oddities. Therese DePrez's ("American Beauty") noir-stained production design suggests urban decay fueled by industrial neglect. Shot by cinematographer Affonso Beato, a frequent collaborator of Pedro Almodóvar, the visuals send a cold, wet chill down your spine.
 
  Salles carefully calibrates the tension between Dahlia's legal battle with Kyle and the supernatural occurrences that begin haunting her. Yglesias' erudite script moves smoothly between the tangible manifestations of horror elements and the psychological terror experienced by Connelly's character. The true suspense lies in the question of whether these are genuine paranormal occurrences, symptoms of Dahlia's rapidly decreasing sanity or some nefarious scheme by Kyle to win his suit to prove her unstable.
 
  As in "Requiem for a Dream" and "House of Sand and Fog," Connelly masterfully embodies the modern woman on the verge of cracking up. Studio execs should also take note of the difference that casting actors of complexity in supporting roles makes. Reilly; Pete Postle-thwaite as the building's super, Mr. Veeck (as in wreck); and Tim Roth as Platzer, Dahlia's lawyer, are terrific, each contributing to the overall feeling that nothing is as it seems.
 
  "Dark Water" at times reaches emotional peaks too abruptly and has its share of "why would she/he do that?" moments, which seem to have become almost requirements of the horror/thriller genre. Salles also wears some of his influences, namely Kubrick and Polanski, on his sleeve, but if you're going to borrow, who better to turn to? These things are easy to forgive, however, because the rest of the film is so good.
 
  Salles avoids the shock cuts and silly, unmotivated twists that addled studio offerings such as "Hide and Seek," "Boogeyman" and "House of Wax" thrive on, instead choosing to focus on building the kind of drama and suspense that made Alejandro Amenábar's "The Others" so satisfying. By concentrating on characters and themes that really connect with an audience, Salles evokes the unspoken fears that fill contemporary urban life.
 
  'Dark Water'


 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for mature thematic material, frightening sequences, disturbing images and brief language.
 
 Times guidelines:
 Children in peril, emotional violence and plenty of nasty-looking liquid.
 
 A Touchstone Pictures presentation, released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution. Director Walter Salles. Producers Bill Mechanic, Roy Lee, Doug Davison. Executive producer Ashley Kramer. Screenplay by Rafael Yglesias, based on the novel "Honogurai Mizuno Soko Kara" by Koji Suzuki and the Hideo Nakata film "Dark Water." Director of photography Affonso Beato. Editor Daniel Rezende. Costume designer Michael Wilkinson. Music Angelo Badalamenti. Production designer Therese DePrez.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 44 minutes.
 
 In general release. 
   

At the beginning of Dark Water , Dahlia (Jennifer Connelly), accompanied by her young daughter, Ceci (Ariel Gade), is given a tour of what may be the single cruddiest apartment building the characters in a Hollywood thriller have ever been forced to occupy. The brackish lobby, with its puke-green fluorescent glare and surly super (Pete Postle-thwaite), is like something out of a public-housing project in Krakow during the late '60s. The elevator is a lurching steel box, and the residential unit, with its blocky claustrophobic chambers, corroded fake-wood cabinets, and rotten black water spot on the ceiling, is about as inviting as a flophouse for crackheads. In Dark Water , you want to yell ''Dear God, don't go in the bedroom!'' — not because of the ghosts, but because of the ugliness of the room.
The building in question is on Roosevelt Island, a residential enclave in the middle of the East River, just off the ritziest side of Manhattan. It's a five-minute tram ride to the center of the city, but how plausible is it that a New Yorker as beautiful and poised as Dahlia, played by Connelly with all her baby fat burned away (and her passive softness along with it), would choose to move her child into such a decrepit hellhole? It doesn't seem likely at all, yet Walter Salles, the craftsmanly and humane Brazilian director of The Motorcycle Diaries , here making his first Hollywood genre film, intends for us to be shocked in that very way. Dahlia, who is in the middle of a bitter custody battle, has no money and no career (she gets a job pushing papers at an X-ray clinic), and she needs to live in a place that's close to a  decent public school. Salles realizes the rotten dank desperation of her life so vividly that he has made, in effect, the first collapse-of-the-middle-class horror movie.
Dark Water  is a shudder-by-numbers pseudo-J-horror gothic, full of supernatural stunts you feel as if you've seen before the movie even gets to them (ooooh, running water! Lots and lots of running water!). It's one of those thrillers in which a little girl talks to an imaginary friend, who's the spirit of the waif upstairs, who in turn echoes the abandoned little girl that Mommy used to be. All the tropes of abuse and vengeful victimhood are right in place, and, oh, does the dirty water gush: from faucets, tubs, washing machines, and from that spot on the ceiling. The real nightmare, however, is hardly metaphysical. It's the fear of being stuck in a home this awful without a plumber.

 Make that dark, stagnant water. A dull and occasionally risible remake of an even duller, more risible Japanese horror flick, "Dark Water" stars Jennifer Connelly as a single mother trying to find her bearings. What makes this redo more tolerable than the usual recycled junk isn't the presence of the Academy Award-winning actress, a first-rate weeper who looks good soaking wet. Or that of the respected director Walter Salles, late of "The Motorcycle Diaries," whose deadly serious style here suggests he thought he was remaking "Medea" or, at the very least, a Roman Polanski chiller. It's that this is a horror movie about being shut out of the Manhattan real estate market.  The Web site for Roosevelt Island insists that the East River isle is "a director's dream!," but for Ms. Connelly's character, the soon to be heavily watered Dahlia, it's a nightmare. After she separates from her husband, Kyle (Dougray Scott), who tends to call her "crazy" at every opportunity, Dahlia confronts one of the most brutal truths to face many a New Yorker: she can't afford to live in Manhattan. (The more pragmatic Kyle, meanwhile, has moved to Jersey City.) Bravely steeling herself against this calamity, she takes her daughter, Ceci (Ariel Gade), by the hand and hops a tram to Roosevelt Island. As they glide above the island's hulking towers and grim-faced hoi polloi, rain falling like tears, Ceci cries out, "Mommy, that's not the city!"  Nor is it Oz, despite the somewhat puckish presence of the always-reliable John C. Reilly as a gently sleazy management agent, Mr. Murray. One of the few niceties about "Dark Water" is that though there's nothing to be done with the hopeless screenplay - written by Rafael Yglesias and based on both the original film by Hideo Nakata and a novel by Koji Suzuki - the supporting players are just dandy. Rounding out the cast are Pete Postlethwaite as a skulking janitor, Camryn Manheim as a concerned schoolteacher and, best of all, Tim Roth as a lawyer who takes Dahlia under wing without soliciting either sacks of cash or a freebie. To watch Mr. Roth smoothly steal his scenes is to regret that this forceful actor doesn't appear in more films.  The plot basically hangs on that Japanese horror movie staple, a little girl who may or may not be a ghost. Soon after Dahlia and Ceci move into their new digs, a small ceiling stain starts to spread at an alarming rate. Although the apartment upstairs is supposed to be empty, having been abandoned by its previous tenants, someone keeps running across its uncarpeted floor and leaving the water running. As the pitter-patter continues and the stain grows, creeping across the ceiling like a malevolent hand, Dahlia becomes jittery, almost hysterical, and very wet. Her husband's favorite slur begins to seem like a diagnosis and for a brief spell it's unclear, much as it is throughout "Rosemary's Baby," whether we're watching a horror film or a paranoid-woman movie.  Too bad we're watching neither. Wildly overproduced and filled with fussy flourishes that make even a derelict hallway look like a million bucks, "Dark Water" fails to rustle up either meaning or meaningful scares. Weighted down with some two-bit psychology and portentously soppy flashbacks involving the none-too-terrifying presence of the cult actress Elina Lowensohn, the film ends up neither fish nor fowl. It's absent the heft of A-level horror ("The Silence of the Lambs") as well as the lightness of touch of those few contemporary horror movies that whether pitched at the multiplex or the art house, replicate the no-frills instrumentality of authentic B's ("28 Days Later"). In these films, horror rules, not, as is true of "Dark Water," the filmmakers' palpable distaste for this oft-abused genre.  "Dark Water" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The film has a few mild "boo!" moments and a couple of bloodless deaths that may be too intense for the young and easily frightened.

The ominous downpours that have drenched much of recent Asian cinema soak New York in "Dark Water," the well-crafted but thoroughly unsuspenseful Hollywood debut by Brazilian director Walter Salles. Remake of the 2002 Japanese film of the same name from the progenitors of "The Ring," novelist Koji Suzuki and helmer Hideo Nakata, is dripping with clammy, claustrophobic atmosphere, but ultimately reveals itself as just another mildewed, child-centric ghost story of little import or resonance. Commercial prospects look middling.
An initial shrewd decision, be it by screenwriter Rafael Yglesias, Salles or someone else, concerning the drama's setting ends up providing the film with its greatest point of interest. Aside from the tram that connects it to Manhattan's Upper East Side, Roosevelt Island has rarely served importantly as a cinema location, a fact extensively exploited by Salles and his crafty team. The rundown Brutalist School apartment complex, sickeningly moist wall surfaces, rotting infrastructure, constant wet gloom and sense of physical isolation all give the film a huge headstart in building a fearful mood.
Unfortunately, the dreadful weather inundating this former outpost of the city's lunatic and criminal asylums does not translate into dread to the profit of the film. Mood is all here, as the plot mechanics advance with all the excitement of an elevator in which every floor button has been pushed.
After a brief prologue that suggests how neglected the heroine was as a little girl, Dahlia Williams (Jennifer Connelly) takes her 5-year-old daughter Ceci (Ariel Gade) on a desultory apartment-hunting expedition.
In need of a bargain and anxious to put some space between her and her Jersey City-based ex-husband Kyle (Dougray Scott), Dahlia succumbs to the amiable hustle of a real estate manager (John C. Reilly, in stellar form) and takes grim apartment 9F in a shabby building whose only advantage is its proximity to a good school for Ceci.
Salles, production designer Therese Deprez, cinematographer Affonso Beato and associates take evident delight in detailing every last miserable aspect of this funky abode. In very short order, this one-time example of progressive architectural thinking has become a collection of caves barely fit for man or beast. The raw materials could provide chills even in springtime, the color scheme revolves around moldy green, the plumbing probably never worked properly and the staff makes you want to check them for parole-mandated ankle bracelets. Then there's that inky stain on Ceci's bedroom ceiling and the weird noises that sometime emanate from the supposedly empty apartment above.
On top of the annoyances repped by her new home and her temperamental ex, Dahlia must cope with a boring job and her daughter's increasing habit of talking to "an imaginary friend" and her obsession with a left-behind Hello Kitty backpack.
The water breaks, so to speak, when Dahlia, rightly indignant at the lousy maintenance service she's getting even for $900 a month, enters the apartment above her to discover it flooded with brackish water pouring from open faucets. Stirred in with the physical threats are Dahlia's suspicions about Kyle's manipulations, her nightmarish memories of her delinquent mother and, above all, the unfolding story of what happened to a little girl named Natasha in 10F.
Although history is full of examples of highly intelligent directors who have made frightening mass-audience films, it's still tempting to suggest Salles' sensibility may simply be too refined for such elemental fare.
Try as he might, the director of "Central Station" and "The Motorcycle Diaries" isn't even capable of implementing a shock cut that makes one jump. Many less talented filmmakers can make you want to look away from the screen for fear of what's coming, but Salles, while loading on the atmosphere in a way that would have delighted producer Val Lewton 60 years ago, can't deliver the jolts to quicken the pulses of 21st-century viewers.
Creditably holding her own in a role that has her onscreen virtually throughout, Connelly is best here at conveying the strain of a woman forced to deal exclusively with issues pertaining to her child's welfare and to cope with a life bereft of any source of pleasure. Gade fills the bill as little Ceci, Tim Roth is amusing in the character role of a New Yawk lawyer whose office is his car, Pete Postlethwaite is suitably creepy as the curmudgeonly building janitor and Scott keeps one guessing as to whether he's evil or not.
Craft contributions outstandingly create and sustain the mood of sodden malevolence in the visual and aural arenas.

A gothic horror redesigned in modernist architecture, Dark Water literalizes the truism that New York real estate is a nightmare. In the wake of an angry divorce, Dahlia (Jennifer Connelly ) treks beyond Manhattan with daughter Ceci (refreshingly non-Aryan Ariel Gade ), but doesn't quite make it to the boroughs, settling for a one-bedroom in that most enigmatic of neighborhoods, Roosevelt Island . Her building's brutalist concrete hallways echo mysteriously; the neighbors seem to consist largely of a pair of wan, pin-eyed, catcalling skateboarders; Ceci suddenly exhibits a compulsion to run away and play dollies at the rooftop's edge; and a blotch of dark liquid seepage looms malevolently on the living-room ceiling. But at $900 a month and with a five-minute subway to midtown, what's not to love?
Turns out that the artfully asymmetrical patch of water damage (which is not so ugly, really—kind of like a Philip Guston  done in india ink) bespeaks a demonic presence, whose evil whispers drip down along with the black water from the apartment above. Gotham renters will undoubtedly sympathize as Dahlia descends into apartment-maintenance- fueled madness. Her claustrophobia spreads beyond the boxy flat; new to the city, Dahlia spends many of her adult-contact hours with a familiar trilogy of metropolitan frustrations: a duplicitous, carbohydrate-faced realtor (John C. Reilly ); the terse, vaguely Balkan superintendent, Veeck (Pete Postlethwaite , whose tongue occasionally migrates into Highland brogue); and an equally neurotic divorce lawyer (Tim Roth ). The city apparently undergoes an unprecedented monsoon season, incarcerating its inhabitants in never ending rainstorms.
While this Walter Salles –directed adaptation of Ringu  auteur Hideo Nakata 's Japanese original painstakingly summons a miasmic atmosphere of urban-development anomie, it fails to deliver the narrative thrill twists its origins would promise. A subplot involving Dahlia's submerged childhood memories never quite resolves into the intended maternal-abandonment theme, though most of the film's shocks are all too easily predicated on scenes in which mother leaves child momentarily unattended. Ceci's imaginary-friend hauntings recall toddler-based spookiness seen in the recent Amityville  Horror  remake—traceable back at least as far as Poltergeist  and The Shining —but Rosemary's Baby  may be Dark Water 's true sick-building-syndrome ancestor, the Dakota's creakings foreshadowing Roosevelt Island's leakings. Whereas Mia Farrow 's paranoid ingenue finds hell in other people, Connelly's single mom suggests a more radically insulated loneliness. Indeed, the film's best moments are ones of doubled interiority, collapsing the mental and spatial, particularly one climactic scene of watery oblivion, which pushes this tendency into audiovisual abstraction.
