 With its raw, grainy texture and forceful sense of urgency, Shane Meadows's unsparing revenge thriller "Dead Man's Shoes" is reminiscent of a kind of film prominent in the 1970's, most notably Sam Peckinpah's "Straw Dogs."  Like a cross between  that film's antihero, a nonthreatening everyman forced to take violent measures, and the unraveling war veteran Travis Bickle from "Taxi Driver,"  the always fantastic Paddy Considine evokes both sensitivity and explosiveness as Richard, a troubled ex-soldier who returns to his hometown in northern England with payback on his mind.  The power of the performance by Mr. Considine, who wrote the script with Mr. Meadows, is even more extraordinary, considering that his character's complex psyche is woefully unexplored, and that there are long stretches in which he is absent from the screen. The main attraction is the gang of loathsome thugs who horribly mistreated Richard's mentally disabled younger brother years earlier, as they are at first harmlessly toyed with before meeting much direr fates at the hands of their personal grim reaper.  That bloody retribution makes "good guys" the equals  of the original wrongdoers is an overused moral, and this film, though told with style and authority, ultimately doesn't have anything fresh to say. Despite some hints at conscience and humanity, "Dead Man's Shoes" is a typical slasher film at the core; Richard even wears a mask as he cruelly and methodically picks off his victims.

A soldier returns to ice the lowlife who humiliated his retarded brother in "Dead Man's Shoes," a darkly loopy genre-bender by Blighty's homegrown maverick, Shane Meadows. Partly recalling his no-budget, slacker featurettes of the mid-'90s, but permeated with the darkness of his impressive second feature, "A Room for Romeo Brass" (1999), film plays as a quirky Brit riff on everything from U.S. slasher pics to revenge oaters but without Meadows' usual psychological complexity. Disappointing step back from accomplished "Once Upon a Time in the Midlands" may click with his small coterie of fest fans but is dead meat in theatrical abattoirs.
Paddy Considine, the unsettling psycho in "Romeo Brass," cops the lead script credit as well as the main role here, as Richard, who, after a spell in the army, returns to his native town in the Midlands and immediately starts spooking his former pals by popping up in a gas mask. Word quickly spreads that "Anthony's brother" is back, and, sure enough, the body count soon starts to mount.
Divided into five day-chapters, film is peppered with scratchy, B&W footage limning a past atrocity against the simple-minded Anthony (Toby Kebbell), though the exact nature of it -- and its result -- isn't completely clarified until late on. Comprehension is also complicated in the early stages by scenes of Richard apparently talking to the dumb but settled Anthony as they hide out at a farmhouse on the edge of town.
All of this wouldn't matter too much if there was enough going on elsewhere in the movie to maintain attention. The villains here are typical Meadows characters -- scruffy, foul-mouthed, basically likable losers -- but helmer seems unsure how far to push the goofy comedy that usually accompanies them. Their leader is the macho, very disturbed Sonny (Gary Stretch), who seems imported from a different world.
Considine's calm, reasoned playing of the hate-filled Richard is at its most chilling when the mass slaughter really starts; but the climax is weak and predictable, accompanied by bleeding chunks of religioso music by Arvo Part that seem a last-ditch attempt to invest the story with some redemptive quality.
Tech credits are deliberately grungy, with Daniel Cohen's photography de-beautifying the workaday settings and surrounding scenery, and color processing is bleak. Running time seems stretched, even at 86 minutes, and some of the accented dialogue may test Anglophone auds.
Camera (color), Daniel Cohen; editors, Chris Wyatt, Lucas Roche, Celia Haining; music, works by Arvo Part and others; art director, Adam Tomlinson; sound (Dolby Digital), Stephen Haywood, Nigel Haeth, James Feltham; assistant director, Griffin ; casting, Carol Crane. Reviewed at Edinburgh Film Festival (British Galas), Aug. 23, 2004. (Also in Venice Film Festival -- Venice Days; Toronto Film Festival -- Contemporary World Cinema.) Running time: 86 MIN.
 


Paddy Considine  is an ex-soldier named Richard who comes home to a small town in England to see his retarded brother Anthony (Toby Kebbell ), who had been hanging out with the local gang of drug-dealing thugs and been cruelly abused. Richard is out for blood, and after breaking into various gang members' houses and pulling pranks, he tells the ringleader, Sonny (Gary Stretch ), that he'll kill them all—and they can even try to come and get him first if they'd like. Fortunately for Richard, Sonny's guys are the stupidest hoods in the world. Dead Man's Shoes  is all about revenge, but in trying to be one of those serious revenge films that questions violence while indulging in it, it manages to keep virtually all the characters unsympathetic and uninteresting. Director Shane Meadows  based the movie on a true story about a young man from his hometown who died. Presumably, then, Meadows gets some sort of catharsis out of it. Too bad we don't.
