
"Deal" is the latest card-tournament drama to suggest that the movies ought to find a more compelling sport, although it's more fun to watch the poker in this movie than the face of its star. Burt Reynolds's eyes, nose, and mouth are all where they were in his swaggering prime, but from certain distances, the surface beneath the features is seemingly too smooth to hold them in place. Depending on the lighting and the camera angle, he looks like a ghostly bust.
Reynolds's body distracts from the little bits of soul he's put into this performance. He plays Tommy Vinson, a poker veteran itching for a final drink from glory's chalice. Having sworn off the gambler's life, he pours his dreams into a tutorial relationship with a young up-and-comer named Alex (Bret Harrison), giving him strategic lessons, getting him drinks, and buying him a hooker, who's played by Shannon Elizabeth. She and Harrison aren't bad, but there's not a lot for either of them to do or say or feel.
Director Gil Cates Jr., who wrote "Deal" with Mark Weinstock, tries to generate emotional drama between Tommy and his patient wife (Maria Mason), Alex and his forbidding father (Gary Grubbs), and Tommy and Alex. But Cates's heart isn't in it. On its surface the movie owes something to Martin Scorsese's "The Color of Money," but Cates isn't a director with that sort of verve, and his characters aren't the sharks Scorsese was eager to swim with. Instead the movie might have drawn a grayer portrait of a has-been trying to coach a rising star, one not terribly dissimilar to John Huston's masterpiece boxing movie, "Fat City" (1972), where Stacy Keach tries to mentor some humility into Jeff Bridges.
But "Deal" doesn't really care about the characters as much as it does the World Poker Championships, where Tommy and Alex end up. Once we get there the movie becomes interesting because Cates understands the game and its dramas a lot better than he understands people and theirs.
Incidentally, Cates is the son of Gil Cates, the longtime producer of the Oscar telecast, and it's disappointing that he doesn't share his father's penchant for glitz. The photography looks dry enough for the scenes to cry out for moisturizer, the announcer play-by-play grates the nerves, and the cranked-up editing and tracking shots are too haphazard to add up to real style. It's TV-commercial stuff. "Deal" could use a touch of the slickness that's making the blackjack drama "21" such a greasy hit. Otherwise, it's like watching a not-very-special episode of NBC's "Poker After Dark."



With the popularity of poker being what it is, every 
movie may eventually be moved to the card table: "Ante Mame." "Deck Tracy." "Flush Gordon." Sam Spade will make a huge comeback. Meanwhile, we have "Deal," aka "The Color of Money" with cards instead of cue balls, replete with a battered Burt Reynolds as the sage vet and Bret Harrison as the brash young phenom. Public fascination with Texas Hold 'em and other poker variations will likely bolster B.O., though more discriminating auds may choose to pass. Or fold.
Those who know the game will probably have a better time, since a lot of what goes on at the tables will seem a bit obscure to the nonplayer. Like most card movies -- most sports movies for that matter -- character is a far more important component in "Deal" than rules and moves.
Helmed by Gil Cates Jr., and co-written by Cates and Marc Weinstock, "Deal" fits in the template of "The Color of Money" in which Paul Newman reprised his "Hustler" role as Fast Eddie Felson and took Tom Cruise under his cue-stick-wielding wing.
"Deal" doesn't operate at anywhere near that level, either in its casting -- Harrison is fine but lacks the young Cruise's magnetism -- or its storyline. "Deal" is perhaps too briskly paced: The narrative moves along a bit too fleetingly for any genuine character development.
There's little reason to feel invested in either the post-college-aged Alex Stillman (Harrison), who has played largely on the Internet and small-time games, or Tommy (Reynolds), a retired poker ace who promised his wife he'd never gamble again, but then sees Alex play and rethinks his priorities.
Reynolds maintains his old gleam of mischief, although the role doesn't ask too much of him. He gets one soliloquy-like moment to talk about Tommy's past, which is the most solemn sequence in the movie.
Like a Strip-weary Obi-Wan to Alex's eager beaver Luke Skywalker, Tommy is cryptic and wise, impatient and usually right about how to play those cards. Whether he is destined to take a seat himself at the championship tournament table, is the movie's lone question -- and not much of one.
Production values are fine, although the film process makes the movie look far darker and artier than was probably warranted.
