
About a half-hour into "Death Sentence," superdad Nick Hume (Kevin Bacon) rummages through his suburban garage desperately searching for a tool, a knife, weed clippers, anything that he can use to kill the young gang member who brutally murdered his all-star, hockey-playing son at a gas station just days before.
One is inspired to yell, "Don't do it!," because as we all know, starting a war with a gang when you are a suburban superdad (or anyone, for that matter) is a very, very bad idea.
But this is the premise of "Death Sentence," the new film by James Wan, the young director responsible for the "Saw" trio of horror movies - that poor Mr. Hume must lose almost everything, including his hair, before he realizes there's no such thing as an eye for an eye.
The movie, like so many revenge films before it (including the mother of them all, "I Spit on Your Grave"), is divided into two violent parts of almost equal length. During part one, Hume is established as a mild-mannered businessman, who seeks to smite his enemies after his son is randomly killed by a gang member. During part two, Hume gruesomely gets his re venge, one young thug at a time.
Moral lessons aside, "Death Sentence" is mostly a gore-packed thriller where an Everyman turns into a Charles Bronson type who has the ability to outrun criminals who are half his age, shoot automatic weapons through concrete, and fistfight like he's Jason Bourne, sometimes using his briefcase as a weapon. Bronson comparisons are appropriate; "Death Sentence" is actually a reworking of 1974's "Death Wish," in which Bronson stars as a similar regular guy who avenges the murder of his wife, guns blazing.
What sets "Death Sentence" apart is that while violence was to be expected from grizzled Bronson, it isn't from Bacon, who is convincing as a happy-dad-turned-gaunt-killer and manages to look as shocked as we are by his quick evolution. Bacon seems intent on proving his dark side with films such as "Sleepers" and "The Woodsman." In "Sentence," he's best when he's clumsy, portraying Hume as a newcomer to violence who looks panicked when he shoots a gun for the first time.
Bacon fares better than his supporting cast, which includes Kelly Preston as Hume's ill-fated wife, pretty boy Garrett Hedlund of "Troy" and "Friday Night Lights" as a passable gang leader, "Friends" veteran Aisha Tyler as a detective, and John Goodman as a gun runner in coke-bottle glasses.
Action-movie one-liners are kept to a minimum, but the film doesn't avoid them altogether. One can't help but giggle when a bald and blood-stained Bacon gruffly barks at Goodman, of all people, "One more thing - I need to buy some guns." And Hedlund's tattooed gang villain beats us over the head with silly fortune-cookie closure.
"Look what I made you," he says to Bacon, telling us as heavy-handedly as possible that superdads and superthugs are not so different after all.
The cynics will slap their foreheads, the squeamish will cover their eyes, but the revenge movie fanatics should be nice and satisfied after the whole ordeal.


         In "Death Sentence," Kevin Bacon descends to the throne left vacant by the late Charles Bronson, that of a law-abiding worker bee turned one-man killing machine bent on avenging his family.
 
 Based on Brian Garfield's novel of the same name (itself a sequel to the book that began it all, "Death Wish"), this latest exercise in do-it-yourself justice-mongering features Bacon as Nick Hume, a risk-assessment company vice president whose No. 1 son is wantonly slaughtered in a gas station holdup.
 


         






   When it becomes clear that his killer will walk away with a three-year sentence, at most, Hume refuses to testify and goes after the guy himself, inciting a gang war that targets his wife (Kelly Preston) and surviving son (Jordan Garrett). The chief detective who investigated his son's murder (Aisha Tyler) is on to Hume, but is spectacularly inefficient in nipping his self-styled vigilantism in the bud.
 
 This allows for some giddily absurd face-offs between Bacon's pin-striped dad and the grunge-clad gang in a parking garage, at home and in a  loft space that begs to be a runway setting for Fashion Week. When he is not tangoing with the venomous killers or the pouting detective, Hume is psyching out a hulking body repair shop goon named Bones Darley (John Goodman). Goodman is given an added measure of grotesquerie by being shot from below, one of several arty design choices employed by director James Wan, who favors grainy high-contrast photography and chilly backlighting. While there is the requisite amount of shorn limbs and splashing blood one might expect from the director of "Saw," Wan should be saluted for putting the coup de grâce off-screen.
 
 In the press notes, the director ponders the film's "Shake- spearean" qualities, while a producer loftily compares it to Greek tragedy. One seriously wonders how much time either of them has spent slumming at classical theater: Exactly which Sophocles or Shakespeare dramas do they have in mind? To give credit where it is due, the fetishizing of gun violence, the cynical distrust of the jury system and the prioritizing of one's own family over the welfare of others are hallmarks that American popular culture should rightfully be able to claim for itself.
 
  "Death Sentence." MPAA rating: R for strong bloody brutal violence and pervasive language. Running time: 1 hour, 51 minutes. In general release.   

 In the latest flashy, pretentious exploitation movie from James Wan (“Saw” and “Dead Silence”), Kevin Bacon plays Nick Hume, an insurance adjuster who sees his oldest son die at the hands of a machete-wielding young punk during a street gang’s robbery of a gas station.  Nick later kills the perpetrator, setting off a police investigation and a cycle of violence that draws in the punk’s older brother, Billy Darley (Garrett Hedlund), the gang’s leader; his interracially mixed crew; and his father, Bones (John Goodman).  Based on Brian Garfield’s novel — a sequel to the book that spawned the 1974 film “Death Wish” — Mr. Wan’s film is a middle-class white man’s payback fantasy, leavened with phony references to class difference. Nick goes from pencil pusher to vigilante superhero in record time, racking up killings and personal tragedies en route to a climactic shootout that imitates elements of the “Taxi Driver” finale, right down to the shaved head,  blown-off fingers and gushing neck wound.  Aside from a stunning three-minute tracking shot as the gang pursues Nick through a parking garage, and Mr. Bacon’s hauntingly pale, dark-eyed visage, Mr. Wan’s film is a tedious, pandering time-waster. It keeps telling us that an eye-for-an-eye philosophy makes the world blind, but its heart is attuned to a quote from Bones: “Go with God and a bag full of guns.”  “Death Sentence” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for graphic violence, language and drug use.

An ordinary family man makes enemies with the wrong gang -- and vice versa -- in the blood-soaked revenge thriller "Death Sentence." This well-made, often intensely gripping genre piece packs some bizarre tonal extremities and a few moments of self-critique into its tale of a grieving father seeking his own brand of justice, but action buffs won't get too hung up on ethical considerations amid all the rousing gunplay and arterial splatter. A confident lead turn by Kevin Bacon and lack of heavyweight competition could enable a minor B.O. killing, with likely superb execution in ancillary.
It's a season of payback on American movie screens, what with the recent Rosario Dawson rape-and-revenge saga "Descent," the forthcoming Jodie Foster vigilante picture "The Brave One" and now this loose adaptation of a 1975 novel by Brian Garfield. While the book reps a sequel to Garfield's 1972 bestseller "Death Wish," Ian Mackenzie Jeffers' script introduces a fresh set of characters and circumstances, albeit with a similar dad-on-a-killing-spree hook.
Straight-laced businessman Nick (Bacon) has a loving wife (Kelly Preston) and two sons, Brendan (Stuart Lafferty) and Lucas (Jordan Garrett). Pic opens with three minutes of grainy camcorder footage showing the family in idyllic, pre-traumatic bliss. Unsubtle dialogue foreshadowing ("Could we all be civilized, just for once, before I kill somebody?" Nick quips) preps the viewer for the worst.
En route back to their suburban home one night after a hockey game, Nick and Brendan stop at a gas station in a seedy district -- just as several heavily armed gangsters arrive. Sequence emphasizes Nick's utter helplessness as he watches the youngest of the group, Joe Darly (Matthew O'Leary), fatally slice Brendan with a machete.
Joe is arrested shortly thereafter, but Nick, realizing the perp won't do hard time, withdraws his testimony and instead trails Joe back to his digs. Their subsequent raw, roughly staged encounter leaves the thug dead and Nick horrified at his actions. It also leaves Joe's vicious older brother, chrome-dome gang leader Billy (Garrett Hedlund), with his own desire for revenge.
Violence begets violence, giving director James Wan ("Saw") the chance to choreograph bravura action, especially a lengthy chase that culminates in the pic's best sequence, set in and atop a parking structure. Bacon realistically conveys Nick's helplessness and self-revulsion at every step, making his inevitable (if tacked-on) transformation into a leather-clad skinhead badass both exciting and a bit hard to swallow. The genre simply demands it (as does Fox's ad campaign, with its noirish Bacon-with-a-baseball-bat imagery).
"Death Sentence" is set at the crossroads of suburbia and gang warfare (well-captured by the pic's Columbia, S.C., locales), an intersection surreal enough to push the film into some very odd tonal territory. Dramatic moments are underscored by excessive quasi-celestial crooning and conveniently timed torrential rains, while a strain of grim humor rears its head elsewhere, notably in the form of a gruff arms dealer (memorably played by John Goodman).
Not without its scruples, the screenplay dutifully questions its protag's vengeful impulses, stuffing some of its critique into the mouth of a stern but sympathetic detective (Aisha Tyler). Apart from the gunslingers' very poor aim, the pic neither lets Nick off the hook nor soft-pedals the consequences of his actions, and the fact he has two very vulnerable loved ones to protect affords the proceedings a tragic heft.
Cinematographer John R. Leonetti gives the pic an ostentatiously gritty, grimy look, with a color scheme straight out of your local sewer. Handheld camerawork and well-orchestrated long takes punch up the action impressively at key intervals.
