Sometimes, too much is about the right size. Case in point: Death of a Dynasty , an amiably raucous, scorched-earth mockumentary about the Roc-A-Fella hip-hop kingdom under the proprietorship of CEO Damon Dash, who also directed, and rapper Jay-Z. (How mogulicious is Dash? This is his second big-screen release in almost as many weeks, following State Property 2 .) The Dynasty notion introduces Dave Katz (Ebon Moss-Bachrach, driving the picture with his goofy jigga earnestness), a fictional, nerdy, white rock journalist who hitches his own pimped-out career wagon to the fortunes of the Roc-A-Fellas and their mile-long entourage. Dave positions himself in the posse and two-times his own Source-like employer by feeding gossip items around town, enjoying all-area access to the living-large lifestyle. But as he yo-yo-yos his way into parties dressed in Ali G drag, what Dave doesn't know is that he's being punk'd.
Anyhow, the snickering, phooey-on-the-media nose-thumbing with which the movie concludes isn't where its playful heart is at: The main event is the way real players play bigger-than-real versions of their own personas, as if dressing for a Halloween party in playa threads — and none with more élan and charm than Dash and Jay-Z themselves. The combined quotient of celebs playing themselves or characters just like themselves is deliriously high (the guest list includes Walt Frazier, Riddick Bowe, Chloë Sevigny, Rashida Jones, Dr. Dre, Duncan Sheik, Run-DMC), and the for-real rappers who go along with the send-up are, to a man, charming naturals at goofing on their own lifestyles. (Sin City 's Devon Aoki conjures all skinny, blank-faced pretty rapper molls everywhere.)
Death of a Dynasty  is one instance where the blurred line between drama, documentary, and Spiñal Tap -inflected parody is the movie's best asset. (Is that a real invasion-of-the-Hamptons party — the neighbors' worst nightmare — or a mock?) Only when he tries to make a didactic point about the collusion between art and commerce does Dash violate his own dictum: ''at the end of the day, it's all hip-hop.''

ave Katz is a young white reporter who wants to be black. He works for a magazine called The Mic and is given a dream assignment, to go behind the scenes for three weeks with Jay-Z and Damon, the star rappers of Roc-A-Fella Records. His editor (Rashida Jones) doesn't want the same old stuff, she says. (And she will be the last female character in the film who does anything beyond looking hot in a bikini top.) Watching the rest of Damon Dash's playful movie is like entering a room where a large, too noisy party is going on and never fully adjusting to the dark or the din. At one point, the film presents subtitles to translate the street language, but that was a lot funnier when the disaster spoof "Airplane" did it for Barbara Billingsley ("I speak jive") 25 years ago. Dave (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) puts on his best baggy clothes, bling and street attitude and introduces himself to hip-hop's beautiful people. Dave takes the jitney out to the Hamptons, where, he says, "they just brought the 'hood to the beach." He smokes a joint the size of a flute and apologizes later for getting a little crazy. He watches as Lyor Cohen (the director James Toback) tells Damon (Capone) that his career with Roc-A-Fella is over. With what seems like unnecessary cruelty. "No one works for you anymore," Lyor, an older white man, says. "You're finished. Jay's in and you're out." And after a few more harsh comments: "This is not your life anymore, man. You blew it." All of this access does great things for Dave's career. He ends up with a newspaper gossip column and a radio show. So he feels a little guilty when, at a press event to announce Damon's new record label, Dynasty, serious violence erupts. Before you know it, one character, coughing weakly as he lies on what must be his deathbed, tells Dave, "You the only cat I trust now." And most painfully: "If I don't make it, you still my dog." Shortly after this, the film offers up a surprise ending, which partly justifies the raucous means. All that can be revealed is this: Somebody been played. "Death of a Dynasty" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes drug use, gunfire, hand-to-hand violence, intense sexual suggestiveness and almost nonstop four-letter words.

An insider joke that spoofs the hip-hop industry and its surrounding media circus, "Death of a Dynasty" marks an inauspicious solo helming bow for Roc-A-Fella Records honcho Damon Dash after co-directing Universal vid title "Paper Soldiers." The premise is not unpromising: Tired of being depicted by the media in a negative light, a rap impresario and his posse manipulate the press for their own amusement and profit. But the execution is so amateurish and the script so witless the filmmakers appear to be having a far better time than the audience. Diehard hip-hop fans may provide enough distributor incentive for fleeting theatrical exposure, but merely as a stepping stone to video.
Flinging open the doors to his Roc-A-Fella empire, business mastermind Dash (Capone) and creative partner rapper Jay-Z (Robert Stapleton), identify a pawn for their ploy in star-struck hip-hop magazine reporter David Katz (Ebon Moss-Bachrach). Given unlimited access to the Roc-A-Fella inner circle and three weeks to put together an expose by his editor (Rashida Jones), David becomes part of the entourage, following the crew from their offices to clubs and parties and to the Hamptons, and diligently digging for dirt while unaware he's being fed a line by Damon.
Planting Jay-Z's foxy girlfriend Picasso (Devon Aoki) as just one of the factors behind a growing rift between the partners, Dash strings David along, fabricating friction the reporter feeds to gossip columns and uses to facilitate his own rise. The stream of scoops helps David secure his own column and radio show, while Damon and Jay-Z orchestrate "the scam of the century" involving a breakaway label and rival recordings.
Aside from Kevin Hart -- who does double duty as the mouthpiece of (literally) silent Roc-A-Fella partner Biggs (Gerald Kelly) and as Dash's rival hip-hop mogul P. Diddy in a derisive imitation -- the humor is rarely contagious. Most of the enjoyment consists of spotting the endless parade of star cameos, including a bevy of celebutantes plucked straight from the New York Post's Page 6 column. Hip-hop stars appearing including the real Dash and Jay-Z, Flavor Flav, Dr. Dre and old-school rappers Jam Master Jay and D.M.C. Latter appearances recall the far more amusing 1994 gangsta rap parody "Fear of a Black Hat."
Script by Mr. Blue has barely more narrative development than the average musicvideo, and the poorly lit and shot film has the technically sloppy look of a home movie. Dash should stick to his day job.
Camera (color), Dave Daniel; editor, Chris Fiore; music, Big Chuck, Theron Feemster; production designer, Cecil Gentry; art directors, Gonzalo Cordoba, Jan Baracz; set decorator, Ann H. McKinnon; costume designer, Sarah Beers; sound (Dolby), Theresa Radka; associate producers, Cha-Ka Pilgrim, Claudie B., Jay Black, Emerson E. Bruns, Ted Weinrib; assistant director, Urs Hirschbiegel; casting, Adrienne Stern. Reviewed at Tribeca Film Festival (Special Screenings), May 7, 2003. Running time: 91 MIN.

 

With:
 Damon Dash, Chloe Sevigny, Kari Wuhrer, Jamie Lynn Sigler, Mr. Blue, Sale Johnson, Lorraine Bracco, Duncan Sheik, James Toback, Drina DeNiro, Michael Musto, Mark Ronson, Flavor Flav, Philip Bloch, Peter Skaarsgard, Jam Master Jay, D.M.C, Carson Daly, Dr. Dre, Walt Frazier, Jay-Z, Master P, Samantha Ronson.
 


"Her personal life was intertwined with the Bolshevik revolution," intones the narrator of this no-frills doc on Nadezhda Alliluyev , who was 16 when she married the 39-year-old future despot in 1919. Best known for 1982's cult classic Liquid Sky , Slava Tsukerman  combines archival footage, interviews with scholars and relatives, and plummy voice-over to dutifully recap the short life of his subject.
Nadezhda met her husband-to-be as a child when her revolutionary father offered Stalin refuge upon his escape from prison in 1908; a few years later Nadezhda's mother had an affair with Stalin—described by one descendant as "a ladies' man." The teenage bride, who had been Lenin 's favorite stenographer, would spend her remaining years producing two children and watching her spouse transform into (in the words of one family friend) "a humanlike beast." Talking heads provide contradictory evidence as to whether Nadezhda killed herself or was murdered (perhaps by Stalin himself) in 1932. Others take the notion that the personal is political to the extreme: "Perhaps if another woman, with less spiritual demands, had been close to Stalin, things would have been different," suggests the dictator's grandson, referring to the barbarity that would ravage the Soviet Union . Yet Tsukerman is not interested in disproving or discounting theories, but merely assembling them.
