Because I can't decide whether unpromising description or rave assessment is a more useful introduction to The Death of Mr. Lazarescu , here's both: In his extraordinary second feature film, Romanian filmmaker Cristi Puiu devotes some two and a half hours to the mortal decline of a decrepit sixtysomething man who calls an ambulance complaining of a headache and stomachache. And had the drama (which won a major prize at Cannes last year) been released in 2005, it would have made the top 3 of my top 10 list — Mr. Lazarescu  is that rich and riveting a film of universal small human moments and big-system failure. A former painter, Puiu has cited the influence of the great French teller of moral tales, Eric Rohmer, in his approach to storytelling. But a lot of Frederick Wiseman's grimmer, real-time, vérité style is also at play; a kind of rigorous compassion hovers over the ever-widening mess. The title patient (well-known Romanian actor Ion Fiscuteanu, heading a superb cast portraying astonishingly real neighbors, doctors, hospital staffers, and emergency technicians) is a widowed drinker in a rotting apartment with only cats for company. Yet as his condition worsens, and his case is bounced from hospital to hospital, Mr. Lazarescu  makes clear, with infinite tenderness, that we're all in this condition of human frailty together.

 "In a real dark night of the soul it is always 3 o'clock in the morning," F. Scott Fitzgerald famously wrote in "The Crack-Up." That's all very pretty and sad, but what about the real dark night of the body? That's not so pretty. You may be able to stop killing your soul with drink, but you can't stop your body from dying.  The grinding ordeal endured by the ailing title character of "The Death of Mr. Lazarescu," a thorny masterpiece by the Romanian director Cristi Puiu, concludes well after 3 a.m. in a Bucharest hospital as he lies dying, unattended on a gurney. That's more than five hours after this 62-year-old patient (Ion Fiscuteanu) is carted by ambulance from his shabby, foul-smelling apartment to the first of four unwelcoming city hospitals. As the hours slip away, his strength deteriorates and his speech declines from gnarly complaining to barely audible nonsense into silence.  The two-and-a-half hour film views this late-night descent of the allegorically named Dante Remus Lazarescu through circles of medical hell observed with eyes that are dispassionate but far from cold. A sustained triumph of ensemble acting, the film seems so absolutely real it absorbs you into its world the same way a documentary like Frederick Wiseman's 1970 "Hospital" seeps into your consciousness.  Like Mr. Wiseman's epic documentaries, "The Death of Mr. Lazarescu" observes the relentless processing of human beings by impersonal social institutions. If you have ever found yourself left alone in a chilly room wearing a hospital gown in glaring fluorescent light, you will recognize that this is the way it is; you've become a harshly objectified human specimen: tiny, alone and vulnerable.  "The Death of Mr. Lazarescu" is only the second film by Mr. Puiu,  who wrote the screenplay with Razvan Radulescu. Mr. Puiu describes his movie as the first in a six-part cycle of "love stories" envisioned as an answer to Eric Rohmer's "Six Moral Tales," although the resemblances between Mr. Puiu and Mr. Rohmer are far from obvious.    Some viewers may contest his description of this first installment as expressing "love of humanity." (Future films in the series will address love between men and women, love for one's children, love of success, love between friends and carnal love.) But beneath its radically unsentimental surface, Mr. Puiu's feeling for human connectedness is palpable; the movie wears a grim smirk.  Another influence he has cited is the television series "ER," which is syndicated in Romania. But where "ER," has "movement in every direction," he writes in the production notes, Romanian doctors move "in slow motion," as if they had all the time in the world. The director is also a self-confessed hypochondriac, and his channeling of his neurosis into the film lends it an extra intensity.  Although "The Death of Mr. Lazarescu" withholds all but the barest facts about its protagonist, we know this: He is a retired engineer, a month shy of 63, whose wife died eight years earlier and who now shares his shabby apartment with three beloved cats. He has a married sister in a nearby city, whom he helps to support, and a married daughter in Toronto. Fourteen years earlier he had surgery for ulcers. Against doctors' orders, he has continued to drink heavily (a sickly sweet concoction called Mastropol). The stench of alcohol on his breath elicits no end of scolding from a succession of doctors who treat him like a naughty child.  On the day of his hospitalization, Lazarescu has a splitting headache and recurrent bouts of vomiting. He calls an ambulance that doesn't come until his next-door neighbors, to whom he goes to for aspirin, call again.  It finally arrives, and with it, a nurse, Mioara Avram (Luminita Gheorghiu), a woman in her mid-50's who remains his only steady advocate over the grueling hours ahead. Based on his complaints and on her cursory examination, she decides he probably has cancer. But the doctors who subsequently examine him overrule her.  Lazarescu has chosen an unfortunate day to become seriously ill. The first three hospitals he visits are jammed with injured survivors from a bus accident that left many dead. The tests he requires are administered only reluctantly after delays and much haggling. After each visit he is sent to a different hospital, carrying his own test results.  Wherever he goes, the doctors and nurses are gruff, impatient, cold and sarcastic. In the nastiest contretemps Mioara is rudely shushed by arrogant doctors who upbraid her for not knowing her place near the bottom of the hospital hierarchy.  Mioara is no saint, and her patience has its limits. And until his energy drains away, Lazarescu himself is a pesky handful of complaints and demands. But by remaining at his side into the wee small hours while the rest of the world flutters around him, distracted and frazzled, she does the human thing. As the filmmaker well knows, a love of humanity gleams most brightly in places where it is conspicuous in its absence.  The movie is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has nudity and strong language.  The Death of Mr.
CANNES , FRANCE— Longer on comebacks than discoveries, Cannes 2005 nevertheless struck gold with The Death of Mr. Lazarescu , the second feature by Cristi Puiu , a 38-year-old Romanian ex-painter. The Death of Mr. Lazarescu —awarded the prize of the "Un Certain Regard" section—is an explicit ode to mortality, not without a certain grim humor. An old drunk awakes with a headache—or is it stomach pain? After a day of self-medication, he calls 911. The ambulance takes over 30 minutes (film time) to arrive, and from the limbo of his squalid flat, Lazarescu enters hell—transported from hospital to hospital for the movie's remaining two hours, variously diagnosed, browbeaten, and ignored by a harried succession of brilliantly acted doctors and nurses. His characters constantly talking and his camera in near-continual motion, Puiu simulates the institutional texture of a Frederick Wiseman  vérité. The inspiration, he says, was Eric Rohmer  and ER : "When you watch the American TV series, there's movement in every direction, the choreography of the characters is amazing. . . . In my country, doctors and everyone else live in slow motion, as if they were on Valium , and still had 500 years to live." And that's even more remarkable.
