
Calling your terrible crime thriller "Deception" is like naming your bad cooking movie "Food" - an advertisement for laziness. In a way, that title saves you some guess work. Somebody is getting deceived. In this case, it's Ewan McGregor. He plays Jack, a wimpy accountant who sounds a lot like Woody Allen.
Jack makes bizarrely fast friends with Wyatt, one of the attorneys in the Manhattan law firm where he's doing some consulting. The speed at which he falls under Wyatt's spell is understandable since Wyatt is played by Hugh Jackman, who's never seemed taller and whose face has never looked so . . . tight. Their first night together, they share a joint and some laughs in a conference room. Jack goes home a little smitten, telling his new friend, "I haven't felt this good since Van Halen in '97." They play tennis together. They go out clubbing.
Intrigue is meant to abound after Wyatt introduces Jack to a sex club called the List, which apparently does not involve two men sharing a hotel bed together. It's just your garden-variety straight-sex-with-strangers group that includes, momentarily, Charlotte Rampling, whose on-screen appetite for erogenous adventure knows no apparent bounds. In "Deception," she informs us that she likes 'em young and pretty much leaves the movie, presumably going back to France where the lousy sex thrillers at least have decent sex.
While the movie, which Mark Bomback wrote and first-timer Marcel Langenegger directed, tries to figure out precisely when to become thrilling, a parade of women arrive to confirm the heterosexuality of our stars. That list includes Natasha Henstridge, Maggie Q, and, most mysteriously, Michelle Williams as a gorgeous, forlorn, and unnamed blonde who mopes her way into Jack's life. Is she the femme fatale or is Jackman? "I don't want to complicate your life," Williams tells McGregor. "I want all the complications you've got!" he replies. Ewan, use protection, please.
Apparently, neither she nor Wyatt is who they say they are. What's shocking about that is that Jack finds it shocking at all. This is at least the fourth unmentionable thriller where McGregor plays a dupe, and it's exasperating watching a clever actor take on so many obtuse characters. When he finally smartens up here it's too late to be believed.
"Deception" coughs up an exploding apartment, an ineffectual detective (Lisa Gay Hamilton), and an outlandishly half-baked finale. Inevitably, we're plunked down in Chinatown, where in dreary Hollywood movies cliches go to play. The movie actually does feel like an Americanized work of Hong Kong moviemaking. But the desperate, derivative style, the nonsense plotting, and leggy, horny women are applied like too much MSG.


As Wyatt, a sleek corporate lawyer in the lousy, sex-without-love-is-for-dirty-people thriller Deception , Hugh Jackman   sports the artfully brushed-back haircut of a guy who regularly Gets Some. As Jonathan, a meek workaholic accountant, Ewan McGregor   parts his hair in the naïf style of a guy who Barely Gets Any. Still, the sharky swordsman makes a show of befriending the virginal-looking dweeb, and it's not long before a convenient cell-phone mix-up has Jonathan living the swinging sex-club life he thought only went to dudes like Wyatt. (Charlotte Rampling   makes a random cameo appearance as a swinger with cougar allure.) But then Jonathan goes and falls for one of the ladies, a gently bruised blonde peach played, perhaps now to her regret, by Michelle Williams  . And the fast life starts to go terribly wrong.
As for Deception , everything is wrong pretty much from the start of this misbegotten adventure in Adrian Lyne territory, including but not limited to the strained mind games that drive the plot, and the tentative New York accents on the actors from Australia and Scotland. 

 A would-be erotic thriller with no heat and zero chills, “Deception” has the kind of glassy, glossy sheen and risible story that mean to suggest “Basic Instinct” but instead invoke lesser laughers like “Jade” and “Sliver.” A miscast Ewan McGregor plays a mouse who falls in with a charismatic (or so the screenplay insists) stranger played by the miscast Hugh Jackman. One improbable thing leads to another, and suddenly the mouse is roaring, having been inducted into a sex club in which beautiful women in French lingerie crawl around on all fours as if auditioning for a remake of “9  ½ Weeks.” At one point a bony Michelle Williams shows up in a fabulous haircut and towering heels that would fell a lesser woman. Complications ensue.  Directed by the first-timer Marcel Langenegger, whose background in advertising is belied by this movie’s sluggish pace, “Deception” was written by Mark Bomback, who did far better coming up with polysyllabic grunts and groans for Bruce Willis in “Live Free or Die Hard.” As written and directed, the characters in “Deception” are little more than avatars,  generic types (good guy, bad man, fatal blonde), that Mr. Langenegger moves from one busy setup to the next. The venerable cinematographer Dante Spinotti, whose credits include “The Insider,” here works with a dark, almost monochromatic palette and bathes the exteriors in an attractive gun-metal blue, but neither his work nor that of the expert production designer Patrizia von Brandenstein (“The Ice Harvest,” “A Simple Plan”) is enough to save the movie from itself.  Cougar fans take note: Charlotte Rampling plays a sex club denizen, sometimes seminude.  “Deception” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Partly clothed women and gun-toting men.

Strip out "Deception's" fleeting nudity and what's left is a throwback to "B" movie days -- a thin thriller, burdened by clunky dialogue and prone to telegraphing its twists. Although the story is steeped in sexuality, commercials director Marcel Langenegger's feature debut doesn't feel particularly steamy, deriving what little holding power it can generate from producer-star Hugh Jackman's turn as a seductive con man opposite Ewan McGregor's buttoned-up, bespectacled accountant. On the coolness scale, Wolverine vs. Obi-wan Kenobi it isn't, auguring a relatively quick theatrical exit to make way for summer blockbusters.
Written by Mark Bomback ("Live Free or Die Hard"), the story starts promisingly enough. Jonathan (McGregor) is working late in a conference room auditing a law firm, when a handsome attorney, Jackman's Wyatt Bose, drops by to chat. They share a joint together, engage in some rapid male bonding and inadvertently swap cell phones right before Wyatt jets off on a business trip to London.
Said phone, however, is really an opening to all manner of debauchery -- providing entry into Wyatt's wild life, and introducing the shy Jonathan to a male-pattern fantasy about anonymous sex with beautiful women. The gauzy, montage-friendly encounters that ensue include a mysterious dream girl (Michelle Williams), whom Jonathan can only identify as "S" from the letter on her key ring.
Given the title, it comes as not much of a revelation to say that Wyatt is not all he seems, drawing Jonathan into a web of intrigue, with Wyatt pulling the strings.
By that point, however, whatever ingenuity the film might have offered has long since dissipated, and the sequences that put Jackman and McGregor together become fewer and further between. Nor does their potential battle of wits develop enough to yield many fireworks, beyond whatever natural charisma the two possess.
Langenegger and cinematographer Dante Spinotti opted to shoot part of the action using a new digital-video camera, but that's about the only fresh wrinkle to be found here, and only manages to make the Manhattan trysts look more like a Lancome ad. The soft-core porn aspects of the plot, meanwhile, merely create a convenient excuse to rush various actresses through the proceedings (Natasha Henstridge, Maggie Q and Charlotte Rampling among them) in what amount to cameos.
That haste is a shame, since even a bit more insight into these women might have resulted in a richer (if more European-style) movie. Moreover, in terms of both screen time and dimension, Williams fares only slightly better.
Then again, even McGregor spends most of his time looking understandably baffled and boyish, without undergoing the sort of rising-to-the-challenge arc that would make his Everyman character genuinely interesting opposite Jackman's menacing rogue.
"Are you free tonight?" becomes the movie's signature line, a coded phrase for Jonathan's liaisons.
Should that offer pertain to seeing "Deception" -- unless the alternative is truly unappealing -- a reasonable response would be, "Nope, I'm busy."
