         The Earth's oceans have been a popular subject for large-format films for many years with films such as "Into the Deep" and "Coral Reef Adventure" plowing the depths for fascinating images to bathe Imax screens around the world. It would be a mistake, however, to think that if you've seen one fish up close and personal you've seen them all. "Deep Sea 3D" is a total-immersion undersea adventure, in which the oceans' glories are on vivid display in three dimensions.
 
  Following a shimmering title sequence, the film moves through a field of jellyfish that appears to surround your head like floating gumdrops. This is not an occasional illusion because the entire film envelops you in an incredible array of fascinating sea life. The effect is continuous and so successful that you'll find yourself holding your breath.
 


         






    Directed by veteran underwater filmmaker Howard Hall, "Deep Sea" stresses the symbiotic relationships of the ocean's citizens in which survival is based on the cooperation of some very odd bedfellows. The visuals are remarkable on their own, but the film also carries a salient commentary on the importance of preservation.
 
  The rainbow nudibranch looks like a rag doll made of orange and magenta yarn, and its unlikely partner is the tune anemone, which looks like a miniature palm tree doing the hula as it's buffeted by the current. The nudibranch depends on raiding the tentacles of the anemone, digesting the poisonous cells and reconstituting them for its own defense. The anemones don't seem to mind, as they quickly grow back the tentacles. Countless other species provide services that are mutually beneficial as the cleaning of one fish can provide a meal for another.
 
  Danny Elfman's score and the amped-up sound effects accompanying some of the stranger-looking creatures makes some sequences feel like an odd, lost Tim Burton nature film. Johnny Depp and Kate Winslet, in a reunion of sorts for the stars of "Finding Neverland," provide the narration.
 
 'Deep Sea 3D'

 
 MPAA rating:
 G
 
 A Warner Bros. release. Director-cinematographer Howard Hall. Producers Michele Hall, Toni Myers. Music Danny Elfman. Running time: 40 minutes. At selected Imax theaters.   

 The infinite wonders of ocean life never cease to amaze, Imax technology continues to advance and, lucky for us, Howard Hall, a longtime underwater explorer and cinematographer, is there to weave the best of both worlds into one package, gargantuan in scope yet compact in time. Clocking in at 39 minutes, which may be about all the eyes can handle, "Deep Sea 3D"  transports exotic sea species literally to our noses. Hundreds of translucent jellyfish, the once-a-year spawning of coral and  much-needed visits to a cleaning station by scummy-looking fish are just a few of the sights to marvel at in Mr. Hall's fourth Imax film, while more villainous creatures like manta rays, sharks and squid swim dangerously close, daring you to keep those 3D glasses on.  The soothing voices of Johnny Depp and Kate Winslet provide the informative yet often uninspired narration. And Danny Elfman's mystical sounds serve up just the right atmosphere for this almost complete immersive experience, during which adults will be made into giggling children, and children into aspiring marine biologists. But until technology wizards develop a way to make audience members invisible, viewers will periodically be pulled out of the film, left to wonder why the guy in front of them is wearing a massive sea turtle on his head.  "Deep Sea 3D" is rated G. 

There's no mistaking the key constituency for "Deep Sea," the latest Imax undersea docu from the filmmaking team behind the far superior "Into the Deep." With Imax pics chronically unable to break out -- beyond the surpassingly odd success of "The Polar Express" -- into wider theatrical realms, and with prime aud still tots on school field trips, the new voyage is pitched right at the grade school set and no higher. Message of environmental threats to global coral reefs is worthy, though, and will be heard across the network of Imax screens through the spring period.
Given widespread reports of coral erosion and industrial-based oceanic pollution, director-lenser Howard Hall's return to the depths should have been more urgent than "Into the Deep," but instead, it's more superficial. Inevitably, the most visually arresting images take center stage, starting with the astonishing view of a giant pack of moon jellyfish swimming out of the distant black and directly toward the camera.
More troublesome is the scripts tendency -- as voiced by Johnny Depp and Kate Winslet, occasionally overdoing it -- to characterize ecosystems of sea creatures and plants as "communities" full of "diversity," suggesting that it takes a village to raise a minnow. Such feel-good rhetoric sounds excessive in what's basically designed as a science education film for school kids, and plays as an extreme over-correction to the somewhat discredited old "survival of the fittest," dog-eat-dog view of nature.
The notion of a supportive, chain-of-being nature works as long as pic is concerned with the health of the coral reef, which is perhaps one of the Earth's most complex examples of vulnerable and inter-dependent ecology. But the thesis comes undone precisely when pic ventures into the deep sea around Baja, the Caribbean, North Carolina and other locales where vicious battles between natural predators and prey are observed.
It's likely a good bet, in other words, that science museum gift stores stocked with Imax-related gear aren't likely to include stuffed-toy versions of the alarming Humboldt squid, whose presence here -- especially in 3-D -- may actually scare the very young. Hall, though, scores a coup when his cameras catch angles of manta ray that look deep inside their gaping mouths.
Imax 3-D process has lost its original novelty, and little is done in "Deep Sea" to find new and exciting ways of using the medium. Despite the giant screen image, pic's best cinematic effect is natural sound lending powerfully heightened reality to the sea life.
