In Departures , this year's Oscar winner for Best Foreign Language Film, a  cellist with daddy issues named Daigo (Masahiro Motoki) loses his orchestral gig and lands a job preparing corpses for the ritual Japanese ceremony of encoffination. Like Sunshine Cleaning , this is a gentle comic tale of grisly  employment opportunity in desperate times. Only Departures  is tender and, at times, rather squishy. It's sure to squeeze the tear ducts of anyone who has lost a parent (hence that Oscar). But Motoki, a droll actor, gives Daigo's embrace of the ''normality'' of death  a stubborn, touching dignity. B–

 It would be unfair to hold a grudge against Yojiro Takita’s “Departures” just because it won the Academy Award this year for best foreign-language film. Admirers of “Waltz With Bashir” and “The Class,” two exceptionally strong runners-up in that category, should not take their disappointment out on Mr. Takita’s entry, which  doesn’t require comparison  with those two formally innovative, thematically daring films. It is perfectly mediocre all on its own.  Overlong, predictable in its plotting and utterly banal in its blending of comic whimsy and melodramatic pathos, “Departures” is, in the end, interesting mainly as an index of the Academy’s hopelessly timid and conventional tastes. It operates, from start to finish, in a zone of emotional safety, touching on strong feelings like grief and loss without really engaging them, and wrapping itself in a protective membrane of tastefulness. Aided by the classical and pseudo-classical music that decorates the soundtrack, Mr. Takita, an auteur of Japanese soft-core “pink” cinema before he turned to more prestigious projects, has made a soft, pretty film streaked with just enough perversity to give it a vague coloration of art.  Art happens to be one of the picture’s ostensible subjects. Daigo Kobayashi (Masahiro Motoki), the smooth-faced protagonist, is a professional cellist who loses his job when his orchestra goes bankrupt.  He and his wife, Mika (Ryoko Hirosue), return to his hometown and move into the small, shut-down bar Daigo’s mother used to run. She has been dead for a few years, and the whereabouts of Daigo’s father, who walked out on the family when Daigo was a young boy, are unknown.  But not all that hard to figure out, once the contours of the story (written by Kundo Koyama) become clear. Desperate for work, Daigo answers an advertisement and takes a job assisting Mr. Sasaki (Tsutomu Yamazaki), a gruff old fellow who is in the business of preparing dead bodies for burial. The disreputable nature of this work makes Daigo something of a pariah, even to Mika, who can’t bear to think that the potential father of her children might earn his keep handling corpses.  It is clear, though, that the ritual of washing and enrobing those bodies is  a rigorous, dignified craft and a source of solace for the bereaved. This is so clear, indeed, that whatever dramatic tension “Departures” might have had is almost immediately stifled. Daigo is such a nice, hard-working young man, and his mentor is so evidently kindly and wise that you never really believe that anyone could hold their vocations against them.  And the movie is so innocuous that you can’t really hate it. There are touching moments, and some well-observed local details and a few interestingly eccentric minor characters. But every turn is signposted so far in advance that you may find yourself wishing for a fast-forward button to confirm your hunches about what’s going to happen. Life is too short to spend two hours waiting for confirmation of what you already knew and didn’t really believe in the first place.

A failed cellist connects with his inner undertaker, his rural hometown and his newly deceased father in the tonally eccentric, lushly scored meller "Departures." Fascinating glimpses into a unique profession trump the pic's emotional manipulation and substantial length, suggesting that its top prize in Montreal could lead to fest action and, following judicious postmortem editing, selected arthouse engagements. Shochiku will unveil the pic domestically September 13. 
Crushed at the breakup of his Tokyo orchestra, for which he'd just spent a fortune on a new instrument, guilt-ridden Daigo Kobayashi (Masahiro Motoki) retreats to his picturesque northern Japan hometown with adoring wife Mika (Ryoko Hirosue, sparkly) in tow.
He responds to an ad for a job, and is shocked to discover "working with departures" refers not to a travel agency, but to "niche market" firms hired by morticians to perform "encoffinments." Having never seen a dead body, but offered a great deal of money as salary by his eccentric new boss (Tsutomu Yamazaki, deadpan), Daigo takes the job but is too ashamed to tell Mika. Ick factor aside, Daigo's discovered his true calling.
Inspired by Japanese author Shinmon Aoki's mortician memoir, "Coffinman," the pic's best parts reveal the meticulous and stylized casketing of bodies for cremation. Performed -- for that's precisely the word to describe it -- in front of family members in various stages of grief, the ritual involves washing, dressing and grooming the body; the trick is to do it while exposing a minimum of skin.
TV scribe Kundo Koyama's first bigscreen script peppers the proceedings with rich character detail and near-screwball interludes that shouldn't fit but somehow do, owing to Motoki's appeal. More worrisome is a sappy montage at the 90 minute mark and a subsequent half-hour-plus that could be tightened considerably by vet helmer Yojiro Takita with no loss of impact. Hirosue has a perky appeal, and wily Yamazaki steals most of his scenes with a minimum of effort.
Tech credits are pro. Joe Hisaishi's typically showy score never met a heartstring it couldn't pluck, and those responsible for the corpses, be they prosthetics or actual thesps, knock 'em dead.
Camera (color), Takeshi Hamada; editor, Akimasa Kawashima; music, Joe Hisaishi; production designer, Fumio Ogawa; costume designer, Katsuhiko Kitamura; sound (Dolby Digital), Satoru Ozaki. Reviewed at Montreal World Film Festival (competing), Aug. 23, 2008. Running time: 130 MIN.
 


The stately Japanese movie Departures  comes into theaters trailing some justified ill will for having trounced the critical favorite, Israel 's Waltz With Bashir , for Best Foreign Film at last year's Academy Awards . It's not hard to fathom what Academy voters, who skew mature, saw in Departures , an earnest appeal for renewed respect toward the old and the dead. But the movie, about a depressive young cellist who discovers his vocation and his better self practicing the ancient art of corpse beautification in a provincial funeral parlor, was also a smash hit with moviegoers of all ages in Japan , and not just because its director, Yojirô Takita, is best known for making soft-core porn. The movie carried off 10 local Academy Awards, a coup previously scored by the 1996 comedy Shall We Dance? .
In form and substance, the two films couldn't be more different—but taken together, they make fascinating bookends for the ambivalence of a society blithely dumping its traditionally tight work and family structures as it races into post-modernity. If Shall We Dance ?—in which a shy young bureaucrat liberates his inner foxtrotter on the ballroom dance floor—extended an impish invitation to Japan's tightly wound male corporate culture to unravel a bit, Departures  gently nudges Japan's alienated new generation to find meaning in the performance of age-old domestic rituals.
Masahiro Motoki , a former boy-band singer who appeared in Shall We Dance? , stars here as Daigo, a sad-sack musician in his thirties who, after his symphony orchestra is dismantled for lack of audience interest, returns with his reluctant but pliant wife, Mika  (Ryoko Hirosue ), to live in his dead mother's house in a beautiful Japanese backwater. Responding to a newspaper ad inviting candidates for a job in "departures," Daigo concludes he's going into the travel business, only to find himself being trained by a monosyllabic undertaker (the excellent veteran actor Tsutomu Yamazaki ) to spruce up dead bodies in preparation for their journey to the hereafter.
Initially disgusted by his pungent "clients" and by the stigma of working with the "unclean" dead, Daigo does a lousy job, which Takita then turns into a digression into the broad physical comedy for which Japan is famous—jarringly at odds with the movie's otherwise gentle tone. In time, though, this remote, subliminally angry young man finds himself strangely moved by the stories of the dead and by the gratitude of the grieving relatives who gather to watch him spiff up their loved ones. Inevitably, Daigo has his own family troubles with an absentee father whom he has never forgiven, and the pining mother he had jettisoned the moment he could head for the big city. Enlightenment and self-healing loom visibly on the horizon, but at just over two hours, Departures  takes its sweet time setting them up, with much foreshadowing and flashbacks to the souring of Daigo's childhood.
Though there's no compelling reason why this minor piece should have triumphed over the far more groundbreaking Waltz With Bashir , Takita's unpretentious classicism and his candid delight in nature work their modest way into our sympathies, along with the plaintive cello pieces by composer Joe Hisaishi , who scored such Miyazaki  treasures as My Neighbor Totoro  and Howl's Moving Castle . Takita springs enough bracing little surprises to save the movie from rank sentimentality—the old undertaker, who claims to hate himself for scarfing down an enormous meat meal after every job well done, is the movie's liveliest character. Departures  is built for simplicity, and, if nothing else, the appeal to decency and integrity of this sweetly old-fashioned tale make it a must for Bernie Madoff 's prison Netflix  queue. Amid the culture of cheating and heedless one-upmanship that has brought the globe to its knees, it's a lovely thing to meet a movie that refuses to divorce what it means to be a professional from what it means to be a mensch.
