
  'Dirty Love' is a cinematic low
 
Attention, Razzie voters.
 
  As arbiters of the awful in the cinematic realm, it is your solemn duty to subject yourselves to the inept, execrable comedy "Dirty Love." It will surely yield nominations for worst picture, director (John Asher), screenplay (Jenny McCarthy), actress (McCarthy, again), supporting actress (Kam Heskin and Carmen Electra) and supporting actor (Victor Webster). McCarthy continues her one-woman crusade to prove that former Playboy playmates can be just as unfunny as nonsurgically enhanced women, starring as a photographer bent on revenge against her cheating boyfriend.
 
  It's a sad state of affairs when you feel sorry for Eddie Kaye Thomas (the "American Pie" quartet) because he's working in material that is beneath him.
 
 "Dirty Love,"
 R for strong sexuality, crude humor, language and some drug use. Running time: 1 hour, 30 minutes. In general release.
 
 --Kevin Crust   

Should we be worried about Jenny McCarthy ? In the course of John Asher 's excruciatingly inept Dirty Love , the perpetual bimbo-ingenue has her breasts vomited on, wallows in a lake of her menstrual blood in a supermarket produce aisle, verbally abuses her sculpted-to-within-an-inch-of-its-life body, and is subjected to character assassination and/or sexual humiliation by a succession of prodigiously moussed dorks. And she wrote the screenplay. A kind of Sex and the City   for L.A. bottom-feeders awash in clichéd, self-loathing misogyny that would make Howard Stern  flinch, Dirty Love  posits McCarthy as a fashion photographer coming to terms with romance after her model boyfriend gives her the heave-ho. A trio of pals ostensibly helps, including Carmen Electra , wielding the most embarrassing faux ghetto patois this side of the Hamptons. It's impossible not to read this post-post-feminist atrocity as a cry for help, but to what end? The only possible rationale behind McCarthy's painfully public self-immolation comes in her pathetic midfilm plea, "Please tell me I don't smell like puke anymore." God, I wish I could.
