
  These 'Deeds' are hardly imaginative
 
Recycling is alive but not well in the outmoded teen comedy "Dirty Deeds," with a result that is more toxic than intoxicating. Employing such staples of the genre as actors years older than the characters they play, moronic authority figures and Scatology 101 jokes, the film strings them together in a nearly laugh-free environment, rehashing such totally '80s fare as "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," "Risky Business" and "The Last American Virgin."
 
  TV heartthrob Milo Ventimiglia ("The Gilmore Girls") stars as Zach, a too-cool-for-school senior who takes on West Valley High's notorious Dirty Deeds — 10 pranks passed down through the ages that must be completed in a 12-hour period the night before the big homecoming rally. Aided and abetted by the super-serious valedictorian (Lacey Chabert), her freshman brother (Wes Robinson) and a homeless man (Todd Zeile), Zach does battle with the school's star quarterback, Dan (Matthew Carey), and a Neanderthal named Riplock (Alex Solowitz). Written by Jon Land and Jonathan Thies and directed by sitcom veteran David Kendall, the first project by former baseball player Zeile's Green Diamond Entertainment proves that independent filmmakers are every bit as capable of turning out mindless and soulless product as the film-by-committee studios.
 
 "Dirty Deeds,"
 rated PG-13 for crude humor, sexual content, language, teen partying/drug references and some violence. Running time: 1 hour, 27 minutes. In general release.
 
 --Kevin Crust

Dirty Deeds  is too mild to be dirty, yet too dirty to be charming, and altogether too generic to be much of anything. It's Friday Night of Homecoming Weekend at West Valley High. Blandly rebellious Zach (Gilmore Girls ' Milo Ventimiglia), boxed in by evil jocks, is performing the less-than-herculean ''dirty deeds,'' 10 fabled pranks passed down from generation to generation. His comely prize is Meg (Lacey Chabert), but along the way, he makes do with a loaf of bread. No, really! He totally Portnoys a loaf of bread! If this sort of thing still has the capacity to excite anyone besides the Keebler Elves, write in and let me know.


Anyone nervous about Hollywood's stranglehold on the dumb-teen-movie market should take comfort in "Dirty Deeds," a dispiritingly lazy high school comedy that feels no less engineered by committee for being independently produced. Ironically for a film about a series of escalating high school dares, there's simply no nerve or verve on display, only paint-by-numbers complacency and the usual farrago of adolescent stereotypes. Even viewers who can still laugh at jokes about accidental urine consumption will be hard pressed to crack a smile -- or, for that matter, a wallet.
Basically the labors of Hercules reconceived as a hazing ritual, the notorious "dirty deeds" have become the ultimate test of manhood at West Valley High School. (To judge by the female students' almost uniformly cheerleader-ish accents, school is aptly named.)
Pipsqueak freshman Kyle (Wes Robinson), tired of being picked on by uber-jock Lawton (Matthew Carey) and his fellow letterman-jacket-clad bullies, publicly declares he will complete the deeds on the eve of homecoming. When Kyle's protective sister Meg (Lacey Chabert from the incalculably superior "Mean Girls") freaks out, Zach (Milo Ventimiglia), a brooding senior with the hots for Meg, volunteers to take Kyle's place and perform all 10 deeds himself -- each one more difficult, outrageous and unlawful than the last -- in just 12 hours.
Alas, the deeds devised by screenwriters Jon Land and Jonathan Thies -- which include cadaver and prosthetic-limb theft and a sex act involving whole-wheat bread (because apple pie is, like, so
 1999) -- aren't any more novel or shocking than standard gross-out hijinks. Zach manages to rise to the challenge every time, thanks to some extremely tidy coincidences, including run-ins with a stunning West Valley High alumna (Zoe Saldana, who enters and exits the movie like a fresh breeze) and, inexplicably, a benevolent mafioso (Mark Derwin).
Meanwhile, pic periodically drops in on a nearby house party where revelers have gathered to drink, hook up and track Zach's progress. This occasions an unlikely makeout session between a voluptuous senior (Arielle Kebbel) and nerdy freshman Bobby (Ray Santiago), who's been duped into hosting the party against his wishes.
Elsewhere, surly authority figures proliferate, including a vice principal (Tom Amandes) with the unfortunate last name Fuchs and an obnoxious bald-headed cop (Michael Milhoan). Considerable screentime also is devoted to another student, a hulking street fighter (Alex Solowitz, whose ferocious Cro-Magnon stare is admittedly compelling).
Pic takes some desultory stabs at illuminating the fringes of a typical American high school -- from death-obsessed goths to white guys with gangsta accents -- to mildly amusing if hardly original effect.
Helmer David Kendall seems particularly hamstrung by the PG-13 rating, with telltale signs of compromised vulgarity (muted almost-profanity, lots of ogling but no nudity) evident throughout. For a film that could have used some bracingly foul "Porky's"-style rudeness, "Dirty Deeds" comes off as too clean by half. The clunky moral lessons tacked on at the end -- essentially a condemnation of the behavior pic has spent an hour or so applauding -- feel wholly unearned.
Tech package is adequate, dullsville pop soundtrack excepted.
