Recent thrillers have been so jangled and torn apart with premonitions, mementos, and hiccups in the space-time whatever that when a movie with the spooky-vague title Disturbia  opened with a freakish highway car crash, I was startled to realize it wasn't a supernatural event. One year after the accident, Kale (Shia LaBeouf), a high school junior, is still reeling from the death of his father; when he lashes out at one of his teachers by popping him in the jaw, he is sentenced to three months of house arrest. It's far from an entirely unpleasant arrangement. The electronic ankle bracelet Kale is forced to wear is a bit itchy, and if he strays past the front lawn, the device will flash and bring the cops over in seconds, but this leaves him with nothing much to do except sit around playing Xbox, watching trash TV, and scarfing ice cream. It's every teen's indolent dream. Even after his scolding mom (Carrie-Anne Moss) clamps down on those pleasures, he can stare out the window through binoculars at his neighbors, like Ashley (Sarah Roemer), the hottie with the oversize grin and '70s hair who has just moved in next door (she's like a baby Marilyn Chambers), or Mr. Turner (David Morse), the smooth creep who may be up to very bad things.
If it's possible to be a rip-off with wit, Disturbia  qualifies. Trapped in his comfortable yet boring suburban home, with all his teenage hormones firing, Kale recalls Tom Cruise in Risky Business , and the comparison is sealed by LaBeouf's new-brand teen-star aura — his videogame addict's darting delivery and slightly withdrawn cool. Ever since Holes , I've enjoyed LaBeouf as a slightly gawky kid, but I confess that I never expected him to grow up into such a confident, darkly good-looking actor — a heartthrob. More reminiscent, really, of the young John Cusack than Cruise, LaBeouf, with his pensive eyebrows and slightly combative poker face, puts Kale's anxieties right out there, especially when he's spying on Ashley and then ducking under the window in case she spots him. LaBeouf gets the audience to identify with his inner worrywart, and also to see his two-handed control over it.
Before long, Disturbia  — hey, it's a catchier title than House Arrest  — moves toward riskier business, turning into a youth gloss on Rear Window , with Kale, in his Peeping Tom chair, piecing together the clues to murder. He doesn't have to do much piecing: Early on, there's a news report about a serial killer with a dented blue Mustang, and the moment that a car with that description pops up, it's clear that Disturbia , briskly paced and crisply shot though it is, lacks cleverness. The director, D.J. Caruso, has a bit of fun with cell-phone cameras employed as improvised teen surveillance devices, and David Morse, as the bad-apple neighbor, once again plays the audience with his hulking, softly dimpled sleaze, his suggestion of dominating intelligence as a mask for violence. But Disturbia , unlike Hitchcock's masterpiece of urban-courtyard fishbowl voyeurism, is a Rear Window  that never bothers to peer into more than one window.


Voyeurism goes high-tech in "Disturbia," a modest but squirmingly fun suspenser that brings Alfred Hitchcock's "Rear Window" into the era of vidcams and cell phones, serving up hearty, youth-skewing portions of PG-13 violence and bikini-bait along the way. Not unlike its engaging star Shia LaBeouf, here playing a house-bound teen who takes on a dangerous new hobby, this nifty little thriller is an irreverent whipper-snapper of a movie, always staying a few IQ points ahead of the competition. Set to open April 13, the Paramount release should find willing peepers on bigscreens, small screens and laptop/iPod screens before long.
OK, so LaBeouf isn't exactly Jimmy Stewart. (And Sarah Roemer, with her habit of doing yoga in tube tops, is more Miss Torso than Grace Kelly.) But as plotted out by scribes Christopher Landon and Carl Ellsworth, "Disturbia" is frequently clever and sometimes downright inspired as it updates Hitchcock's 1954 masterpiece for a uniquely paranoid present.
One year after his father was killed in a car accident, troubled teen Kale (LaBeouf) is sentenced to three months' house arrest for punching out his Spanish teacher. When his firm but loving mother (Carrie-Anne Moss) also cuts off his access to videogames and iTunes, Kale begins spying intently on his neighbors -- eyeing with particular interest Ashley (Roemer), a willowy young beauty (and avid swimmer) who just moved in next door.
Through his binoculars, Kale starts noticing some suspicious behavior from creepy older neighbor Robert Turner (David Morse) -- a bloodstained fender here, a lady-friend in distress there -- and lets his imagination run wild, egged on by news reports of a serial killer on the loose. Best bud Ronnie (Aaron Yoo) and Ashley soon find themselves similarly engrossed in Kale's game, though they're not always so willing to accept his wildly implausible conclusions.
One of the chief pleasures of "Disturbia" is the way helmer D.J. Caruso combines old-fashioned suspense techniques with newfangled techno-savvy. Grainy Camcorder footage is exploited to particularly nerve-shredding effect: An ingenious extended sequence in which Ronnie breaks into Turner's house, while Kale monitors the action via live digital feed, is unnerving precisely because of what it doesn't
 show the viewer.
Ellsworth's previous script, for the Wes Craven-directed "Red Eye," proved similarly resourceful at wringing thrills and chills from a small-scaled, intensely claustrophobic scenario. Though less stagebound, "Disturbia" shows both integrity and formidable genre smarts, ratcheting up tension and raising pitch-black chuckles while, for the most part, remaining as shackled to the protag's house as he is. (Kale's metal ankle-bracelet, which alerts the police if he ventures outside his front yard, is an especially instrumental plot point.)
Playing a character who's frequently foolish, impulsive and unsympathetic, LaBeouf relies on his sharp wit and sense of mischief to keep the viewer on his side; he's well matched by the hilarious Yoo, who shows great stoner-comedy potential. And while she disappears for long stretches at a time, Moss wearily conveys a fierce bond with her son that adds an emotional dimension to the pic's conventional slasher-movie finale.
Although he doesn't invite sympathy for the devil the way Raymond Burr did in "Rear Window," Morse makes a seriously creepy (if fairly unambiguous) bad guy with his towering 6'4" frame and dangerously soft, sickly-sweet voice.
Absent any Hitchcockian layers of viewer implication (here, ogling is a guilt-free pleasure), "Disturbia" shouldn't be mistaken for much more than a teen movie par excellence. But it'd also be wrong to assume it has nothing on its mind. Pointedly relocated from "Rear Window's" Greenwich Village apartments to Anytown, USA, pic has slyly resonant things to say about both suburban paranoia (as implied by its generic title) and young Gen-Yers with too much technology on their hands.
Prologue, which contains not one but two of the most sickeningly choreographed car crashes in recent movie memory, effectively sets up Kale's predicament but could be excised with no harm to the final product.
Exterior locations rep a canny mix of Southern California suburbs. Jim Page's editing is razor-sharp, while the tense, Bernard Herrmann-esque strings of Geoff Zanelli's score are suitably sexed up with thuddingly percussive beats and a smattering of rock tunes.

Writers Christopher Landon and Carl Ellsworth  receive sole credit for the movie Disturbia , which is surprising, as the film clearly is based on both a previously published work (a 1942 short story by Cornell Woolrich  titled It Had to Be Murder ) and the John Michael  Hayes–penned, Alfred Hitchcock – directed, Academy Award –nominated screenplay of Woolrich's tale. The latter would be 1954's Rear Window , starring, of course, Jimmy Stewart  as a wheelchair-bound and housebound Peeping Tom who suspects his next-door neighbor has murdered at least one young woman. And what, precisely, is Disturbia about? Shia LaBeouf  plays a housebound Peeping Tom who suspects his next-door neighbor has murdered at least one young woman. But wait, there's no wheelchair in Disturbia . So scratch that. Not the same story. Not at all.
There's not one single bombshell dropped in Disturbia ; everyone is exactly who you think they are and does exactly what you think they'll do precisely when you think they'll do it. The audience is liable to spend the whole screening nodding its collective head in agreement, offering its yawning approval as the story goes through the creaky motions with nary a narrative letdown as it winds its way toward the okey-dokey adios that sends our fair, imperiled protagonists on their merry way.
But it must be said, Disturbia is also a marked improvement for the man who made it: director D.J. Caruso , who is responsible for such leaden, nonsensical dreck as The Salton Sea   and Two for the Money , the latter of which makes sense only when viewed in reverse with the sound muted. At least this time around Caruso has proven he can get a film from point A to B without tripping over the "why." There are no plot twists in this film, no curves or bends of any kind. It's . . . functional, which is intended as a sincere compliment.
Disturbia does have one thing going for it: LaBeouf, who's so good he's managed to shrug off his Project Greenlight debacle The Battle of Shaker Heights  , the Charlie's Angels sequel, and I, Robot . LaBeouf plays Kale Brecht , a high schooler who, during the movie's opening minutes, watches his dad get killed in a gruesome traffic accident on their way home from a blissful pop-and-kiddo fly-fishing trip. The incident renders Kale bitter, sullen, withdrawn, until one day he pops off in class and winds up in home detention during, naturally, summer break—with Mom (Carrie-Anne Moss , already relegated to matronly roles) as his jailer.
Kale, electronically tethered to police HQ, can't leave the confines of his yard, so he and his best friend Ronnie (Aaron Yoo ) hide behind upstairs window drapery to spy on the neighborhood: the pre-teen porn junkies who leave flaming bags of dog shit on doorsteps, the new Dream Girl Next Door (Sarah Roemer ) who reads on her rooftop, the creepy dude (David Morse , duh) with the dented Mustang just like the one driven by a suspected murderer. It's only a matter of time before Roemer's character, Ashley, becomes the Nancy Drew  to Kale and Ronnie's horndog Hardy Boys. (If Sarah Roemer is this movie's Grace Kelly , does that make Aaron Yoo its Thelma Ritter ? And David Morse its Raymond Burr ? To the last, sadly, the answer is a head-hanging yes.)
LaBeouf gets us to buy the whole stale routine: the resentful teen who disobeys Mom by refusing to turn off his video game, the love-struck doofus pining after the shiksa over the hedge, the brave action hero wielding heavy objects. There's no doubt that's why LaBeouf's often mentioned in the same gossipy whispers as "Indiana Jones Jr. "; few other actors of his generation can play every shade of young adulthood without it coming off as a routine (the only other of note is Joseph Gordon-Levitt , he of Brick  and The Lookout ). Hopefully, LaBeouf will be allowed to graduate high school soon, lest he wind up like John Cusack  in the mid '80s and turn up at one too many proms.
Morse, sadly, is once more cast in the unwinnable role of the villain so treacherous and obvious he does all but twirl his mustache while tying the girl to the train tracks. The wasting of David Morse—a complex actor whom only Sean Penn , twice Morse's director, seems to notice—is a subject that should not go without comment: His filmography, dating all the way back to the trashy pleasure The Long Kiss Goodnight in 1996, is cluttered with disposable bad guys like Disturbia 's Mr. Turner, who skulks around in the shadows of his garage when he's not splattering blood (yes, but whose?) on a workroom window.
But, of course, this film is not about making Morse anything other than a creep, LaBeouf a hero, Roemer a girlfriend, Yoo the comic relief, and Carrie-Anne Moss the naive mom. Ironically, Disturbia 's a thriller that doesn't want to bother you.
