         As Debra Granik's unsparing yet beguiling "Down to the Bone" opens, Vera Farmiga's Irene, an upstate New York blue-collar mother, is helping her two small sons get into their Halloween costumes. Vera lives in a modest but inviting house in a semirural area with her husband, Steve (Clint Jordan), and their kids and works as a supermarket cashier. She is a slim, striking woman but seems unaware of her distinctive beauty, marked by intense pale eyes and dramatic cheekbones, and quietly carries out her tasks as a mother and homemaker capably and devotedly.
 
  Yet before she sets out to escort her sons in their trick-or-treating, Irene darts into her bathroom for a quick line of coke. Irene and her environment seem so stable and normal her drug taking comes as a shock.
 


         






    In truth, Irene, who looks to be in her mid-20s, is a longtime cocaine addict, having started in high school. How she has managed to hold her life together for so long seems nothing short of miraculous, but now she's finding it hard to afford her habit. However, instead of going off the deep end, she enters a rehabilitation center where she receives much encouragement from its chief counselor, Bob (Hugh Dillon), a former heroin addict now clean for five years.
 
  Bob has a beatific smile and is so concerned that Steve will pressure Irene into checking out of the clinic too soon that he successfully persuades her to join a 12-step group upon her departure.
 
  With characteristic stoicism, Irene has submitted to the rigorous rehabilitation program with determination and with little complaint.
 
  But she has not reckoned with the growing mutual attraction between her and Bob, coupled with the thickheadedness of Steve, whose laid-back sweetness belies a dangerous, hypocritical selfishness. Irene's survival instincts will be put to the test.
 
  Along with its deftly illuminated characterizations of Irene; Bob; Steve; and Lucy (Caridad de la Luz), a strong-willed, clear-eyed young woman Irene befriends at the rehabilitation center, "Down to the Bone" in its low-key way suggests that recreational drugs, despite their potential for devastation, can work their way into everyday life. Indeed, key to Irene's predicament is that Steve apparently can be a casual user and sees coke as a way to jump-start his and Irene's waning sex life.
 
  In a confident and inspired feature debut, Granik, inspired by real-life events, is not depicting anything an intelligent person is not already aware of. Yet her film has the effect of revelation because her approach is resolutely understated. "Down to the Bone" emerges with an aura of authenticity so strong as to be mesmerizing, thanks to a superior script brought to life with infallibly natural performances, especially that of Farmiga, soon to be seen in the crime thriller "Running Scared" and currently filming Martin Scorsese's police drama "The Departed" opposite Matt Damon, Leonardo DiCaprio and Jack Nicholson. No matter how successfully Farmiga scales the heights in film, her Irene, in which resilience and vulnerability run neck and neck, will always remain a milestone in her career.
 
 
'Down to the Bone'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 Times guidelines:
 Considerable drug use, some sensuality, strongly adult themes
 
  A Laemmle/Zeller Films release of a Down to the Bone/Susie Q Productions presentation. Director Debra Granik. Producers Susan Leber, Anne Rosellini. Screenplay by Granik and Richard Lieske. Cinematographer Michael McDonough. Editor Malcolm Jamieson. Music supervisor Joe Klotz. Costumes Nancy Brous. Production designer Mark White. Set decorator Lisa Scoppa. Running time: 1 hour, 45 minutes.
 
  Exclusively at the Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., West Hollywood, (323) 848-3500.   

"Down to the Bone," which won a Special Jury Prize at last year's Sundance Festival, is the kind of movie most independent films strive in vain to be: a small, beautifully faceted gem. Vera Farmiga gives a pitch-perfect performance as Irene, a mother of two who works as a supermarket cashier in upstate New York. Though she appears to be a competent employee and loving wife and mother, Irene's life is precariously built around  a cocaine addiction. When she finds herself trying to cash her son's birthday check to pay off her dealer, Irene decides to check herself into rehab. But an affair with a charismatic male nurse (Hugh Dillon) threatens to drag her into the even more dangerous world of heroin. The story was based on nearly five years' worth of video shot by the director, Debra Granik, and her cinematographer, Michael McDonough, documenting  a situation similar to Irene's. Ms. Granik writes dialogue that is spare enough to ring true, yet rich enough to flesh out every character, including Irene's young sons. She is also admirably rigorous in her avoidance of the pat narratives of abjection and redemption common in stories of  drug addiction. Even as Irene makes bad choices, she remains a sympathetic and intelligent character, and the film's ambiguous conclusion is as heartbreaking, and as hopeful, as real life.

Debra Granik develops empathy toward the working class wife and mother trying to overcome a coke addiction in "Down to the Bone," without becoming too sentimental. First-time feature director's disciplined objectivity is coupled with humanism in this collaboration with a gifted cast and cinematographer. The artistic success, though, may be a bit too cool and lack the drama that hungry distribs are looking for, but pic nevertheless warrants serious and loving care from handlers who can guide it through the market.
The pent-up emotions and disappointments simmering inside Irene are expressed with magnificent quietude by Vera Farmiga("Love in the Time of Money," "Dummy"), who finally gets a role that shows her talent. Farmiga's work and the film as a whole show keen intelligence, fearsome commitment and an admirable disregard for flashiness.
Michael McDonough's digital lensing is surpassingly beautiful and should finally silence skeptics of the cinematic capacity (or limits) of digital video. McDonough also shot Granik's short, "Snake Feed," from which "Down to the Bone's" story is derived. Lenser achieves crystalline resolution on the bigscreen with fairly modest means, abetted by a high-def transfer.
Irene juggles getting her kids (Jasper Moon Daniels, Taylor Foxhall) ready for trick-or-treating, working as a supermarket checkout clerk and mulling over minor home improvement decisions with husband Steve (Clint Jordan). Even as she tends to her boys, Irene briefly slips into the bathroom to quickly snort some coke.
Irene checks herself into a rehab clinic, where Bob (Hugh Dillon), a male nurse she recently met during Halloween, assists doling out methadone. She makes friends with Lucy (Caridad "La Bruja" De La Luz), whose gruff exterior hides a good heart. Clinic scenes, as well as later ones in Narcotics Anonymous meetings, are authentic, unlike similar scenes in "28 Days."
Rather than stick with the rehab program, Irene returns home, staying sober and trying to mend matters with an absurdly elaborate Thanksgiving dinner. Another downhill slide begins when she explains to her bosses that she can no longer be as speedy at checkout as when she was high all the time.
Open ending wraps on a sad, reflective and highly memorable moment.
Dillon's perf as a man who only seems to have it together is marvelous in every detail, and Jordan and De La Luz are completely believable. Cuteness isn't part of the agenda with kid thesps Daniels and Foxhall, and this becomes crucial to the film's genuineness.
Production is a model of what can be done on a tiny budget, and makes the most of chilly upstate New York conditions. Minimalist soundtrack, including brief selections from a handful of indie bands, ideally suits a film that doesn't depend on pressing emotional buttons.
Camera (Post Works color, DV-to-high definition video, digital projection), Michael McDonough; editor, Malcolm Jamieson; music, Slug , Jackie O Motherfucker, East River Pipe, Low; music supervisor, Linda Kennedy; production designer, Mark White; costume designer, Nancy Brous; sound, James Demer; supervising sound editor, Lewis Goldstein; casting, Ellen Parks. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 18, 2004. Running time: 101 MIN.
 


Like Junebug , this year's other laconic regionalist gem, Debra Granik 's Down to the Bone  lets stirring location shots convey some weighty themes. The milieu here is New York's Ulster County , idyllic summer haven for well-heeled Gothamites and year-round rut for blue-collar communities struggling with distended industrial decline. We open on a slushy supermarket parking lot, drop-ceilinged by the kind of foggy clouds that hang low over wintry Catskill valleys. Other than the prattle over a staticky car radio, the first human utterance is cashier-protagonist Irene's rote query to her grocery line customer, "Do you have an advantage card?"
Granik is perhaps overly enamored with lines like these and their visual equivalents—most obviously the American flags adorning homes far outside this nation's capitalist winner's circle. But any such punctuation in this tale of everyday addiction is mitigated by her refusal to turn Irene's slippery-slope tragedy into a tantrum. As Irene, an unhappily married mother of two young boys, Vera Farmiga  embodies the fatigued beauty of a ground-down good-time girl. Her and her husband's drug use is thrillingly understated. When she's had a hard day, she calmly asks him to bring her home "a little somethin'." When he doesn't, she bummed-ly licks the foil from her last batch of coke, then feels like a jerk when she tries to buy more the following day with her son's birthday money.
Most addiction flicks track the spiral, with rehab as rescue. But Granik's movie is really about working-class poverty, and for a woman like Irene, trying to avoid using means imperiling a job, disrupting a necessary support system, upsetting the balance that ironically makes life work. Like Catherine Hardwicke 's Thirteen , this film has an ear for the way moms talk to kids, a sensitivity to drug-sweetened intimacies, and an appreciation of the urgent nuance, not just the comedy, of recovery-speak.
This humanism allows Granik to pull off heavy-handed maneuvers—entangling Irene in an affair with a nurse (Hugh Dillon ) to let us in on the bleakness of hospital life; using group therapy to evidence the diverse face of upstate poverty; sending Irene on a housecleaning job to dig at the depressed region's luxury condo boom; allowing a pet snake's feeding ritual to symbolize dream suffocation. But it all works, and when one of Irene's recovery pals matter-of-factly confesses to the group, "I just feel more comfortable high," it's nothing less than a lacerating indictment of a culture that worships confidence while limiting all but the emptiest means of achieving it.
