         Far from a liberal screed, the documentary "Voices in Wartime" is a thoughtful, provocative exploration of the ways poets have dealt with the experience of battle throughout history. The words of Homer, Emily Dickinson, Wilfred Owen and Langston Hughes as well as a scribe from ancient Babylonia and contemporary writers are read with eloquence against a backdrop of disturbing images from actual combat footage and from fiction films, to produce a searing chronicle of the effects of armed conflict on humanity.
 
  The film juxtaposes the historical record with the effort of a group of poets to oppose the invasion of Iraq. In early 2003, with the war just weeks away, more than 50 writers, led by Sam Hamill and Emily Warn, felt disinclined to participate in a symposium organized by Laura Bush on "Poetry and the American Voice," and organized to register their resistance. They felt it hypocritical to celebrate writers such as Dickinson and Hughes with an administration that was on the verge of staging what they viewed as an unnecessary war.
 


         






    Though there is an inherent antiwar message — it seems impossible to deal realistically with the subject and feel otherwise — the film steadfastly focuses on the effects of war and the idea that no one escapes it unchanged. Among the scholars and artists interviewed are current and former soldiers, including Lt. Gen. William J. Lennox Jr., the superintendent at West Point, whose doctoral dissertation at Princeton was on American war poets.
 
  Released to coincide with National Poetry Month and the second anniversary of the war with Iraq, the articulate film is backed by the Voices in Wartime Network, a worldwide effort to communally respond to the traumas of war. Director Rick King collects insightful interviews and affecting visuals, while uniting personal stories and universal themes, to create a documentary that inspires its own level of shock and awe.
 
 "Voices in Wartime,"
 unrated. Some gruesome war images. Running time: 1 hour, 14 minutes. Exclusively at Laemmle's Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., West Hollywood, (323) 848-3500.
 
 
 
  Men will be boys at the 'Derby'
 
 
The aimed-at-kids comedy "Down and Derby" stars Greg Germann as one among a cul-de-sac of suburban dads who elbow aside their young sons to replay their own childhoods. Driven to win the local Pinewood Derby, a competition in which Cub Scouts craft 5-ounce racing cars from a block of wood, the grown-ups become obsessed with designing and building the ultimate car to settle a decades-long feud with a neighbor.
 
  Written and directed by Eric Hendershot, a veteran of family films for the home video market, the cartoonish movie might have made for a funny half-hour short or sitcom pilot but runs out of track well before its conclusion.
 
  Ten-year-olds will be amused by its wealth of sight gags and pre-adolescent fixation with breasts, but most adults will find themselves checking their watches.
 
 "Down and Derby,"
 rated PG for some crude humor, sensuality and brief mild language. Running time: 1 hour, 34 minutes. In selected theaters.   


Strongly reminiscent of Disney-produced live-action features from the 1970s, "Down and Derby" is a modestly amusing family-friendly comedy about a miniature car race that brings out the worst in overzealous fathers who compete with each other through their children. Lacking marquee names and high concept hooks, pic likely will reach target aud as cable and homevid fare after pro forma theatrical run.
Pic revolves around preparation and participation by fictional rivals in real-life Pinewood Derby, an annual competition intended for children ages 7 to 10, and trademarked by the Boy Scouts of America. (BSA approval of "Down and Derby" script is duly noted in closing credits.) The regulation five-ounce, seven-inch-long cars launched downhill along steep racetracks are supposed
 to be built by youngsters. But writer-director Eric Hendershot indicates here that dads often provide a lot more than advice and support during manufacture of the tiny vehicles.
Phil Davis (Greg Germann of TV's "Ally McBeal") proves to be even more obsessive than his long-time buddies, Big Jimmy (Perry Anzilotti) and Blaine (Ross Brockley), when it comes to building a better car for upcoming Pinewood Derby. Neglecting his work as an ad agency exec and greatly upsetting his disapproving wife (Lauren Holly), Phil more or less tells his young son (Adam Hicks) to take a hike while he devotes inordinate time and expense to designing, constructing and test-racing a worthy entry. Big Jimmy and Blaine do pretty much the same thing for their own sons.
Phil's eager to exploit the Derby competition to finally defeat neighbor Ace Montana (Marc Raymond), a smooth operator who has been beating Phil in various competitions since grade school. (Not surprisingly, Ace is aiding his
 son in Derby preparations.)
Hendershot does an efficient job of enhancing his formulaic plot with daubs of eccentric character detail and genuinely perceptive satire. Funniest running gags involve overcompensating efforts of diminutive Big Jimmy to live up to his nickname. Appreciably less uproarious is a fleeting subplot about a visiting Japanese businessman (Pat Morita) who accepts a Derby car as a TV commercial prop.
Typical for this type of family-skewing comedy, performances vacillate between engagingly broad and annoyingly overstated. Reasonably slick production values may look even more impressive on home screens.
