 "Down in the Valley" is a neo-western with dreams as big as the fantasies that consume its protagonist, a Stetson-wearing suburban cowboy who calls himself Harlan Carruthers. Portrayed by Edward Norton (one of the movie's co-producers) with the same queasy mixture of ingenuousness and cunning he brought to his career-making performance in "Primal Fear," Harlan claims to be a rancher from South Dakota transplanted to the San Fernando Valley, where he lives by himself in a crummy motel.  A walking anachronism, Harlan politely mutters "aw shucks," "ma'am" and "sir" when addressing strangers. Although his cold, flinty eyes hint at sociopathic derangement, we initially cling to the image he presents of himself: the modern embodiment of Hollywood's laconic, soft-spoken cowboy hero. He's a gust of clean air in the polluted jungle of strip malls and freeways that the movie's stunning cinematography paints as a gorgeous hell with hidden pockets of rural heaven.  While pumping gas, Harlan meets Tobe (Evan Rachel Wood), a bored, sullen teenager on her way to the beach with friends. When she invites him along, he impulsively quits his job and joins them. The couple's first day together develops into a romantic idyll that lifts Tobe (her name is short for October) out of her perpetual sulk.  Beautiful and rebellious, Ms. Wood's Tobe is almost as complex as Mr. Norton's Harlan. And as the cracks in his perfect image widen into crevices, we empathize with her reluctance to admit disenchantment. The first serious signs of trouble come when Harlan takes Tobe to the country for a ride on a white horse that belongs to an eccentric rancher (Bruce Dern) he claims is a friend, and the "friend" pursues them with a gun.  "Down in the Valley" begins semirealistically, then veers off course, hurtling into the wild blue yonder of myth and allegory. On the way to a climactic shootout that begins on the set of a Hollywood western and ends on a foggy hillside, it makes several screeching, hairpin turns.  Whether you want to remain on board till the end of the ride will depend on your appetite for the kind of cultural metaphors that David Jacobson, the writer and director, flings onto the screen with abandon. "Down in the Valley" is the third movie written and directed by Mr. Jacobson, whose small-budget films "Criminal" and "Dahmer" (a biography of Jeffrey Dahmer) hinted of what was to come. Whether or not you like it, you have to admire his courage in going for broke.  Tobe and her shy younger brother Lonnie (Rory Culkin) live in too-close quarters with their father, Wade (David Morse), a sharp-eyed law officer, bruiser and fierce parental watchdog. When Wade meets Harlan, he immediately smells a rat, despite the young man's obsequiousness.  Both Wade and Harlan are revealed to be gun fetishists. Wade keeps a valuable collection of firearms in the house. Harlan spends hours alone in his motel room in front of a mirror, spinning dual Colt .45's and practicing two-handed draws. In an obvious quotation from "Taxi Driver," he sneers defiance into the dead air like a cowboy Travis Bickle. He also becomes a big brother to Lonnie, a forlorn 13-year-old who still sleeps with the lights on. A disquieting scene in which he gives the frightened Lonnie shooting lessons sends mixed signals, since Lonnie laps up the attention he so badly needs.  "Down in the Valley" would like nothing less than to be seen as the ultimate deconstruction of the Hollywood western and of the cowboy archetype, lost in the wasteland of the New West. Reckless and smart, it juggles nostalgia (lyrical echoes of "Red River," "My Darling Clementine" and "Shane") and disgust (Harlan, with his Colt .45's and no wide-open spaces to patrol, is a destructive product of the bogus idealized frontier hero).  Like a gunslinger himself, Mr. Jacobson strides into territory where Sam Shepard put down roots decades ago (and which Mr. Shepard reassessed in his screenplay for the recent film "Don't Come Knocking"). Mr. Jacobson claims it with a boldness that Mr. Shepard has long since forsaken.  "Down in the Valley" seriously loses its way in a mystifying sequence that delves into Harlan's real background and includes a shooting that appears lethal until the victim emerges absurdly unscathed. But once it regains its footing, it leaves you pondering questions about the American character that continue to haunt us: What's the difference between a rugged individualist and a psychotic loner? Where does puritanical morality shade into gross intolerance? And why is it our national fate to be so gun crazy?  "Down in the Valley" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual scenes, strong language and violence.

Following two striking, but little-seen low-budget features, writer-director David Jacobson paints on a larger canvas for "Down in the Valley." Result is imperfect and overlong, but hugely ambitious and often breathtaking. The story of a charismatic stranger's encounter with a suburban family is transformed into a contemplation of myths of the American West and the dangerous pull of movie illusion. Downbeat tone and stream-of-consciousness narrative feel circa 1975 and signal a tough road commercially in 2005. "Down" should garner attention, however, for its gallery of outstanding performances (led by star-producer Edward Norton) and the original vision of its prodigiously talented maker.
The "Valley" of pic's title is none other than Los Angeles' San Fernando Valley, favored location of that other 1970s nostalgist, Paul Thomas Anderson. "Valley," though, has its strongest roots in Jacobson's own earlier films ("Criminal," "Dahmer") and their disturbingly intimate portraits of individuals unable to function within the parameters of "normal" society.
Decked out in weathered Stetson, snap-button shirt and dusted-up blue jeans, Harlan Caruthers (Norton) seems as anomalous a figure as he tends to the pumps at a Valley service station. When comely 18-year-old Tobe (Evan Rachel Wood) stops for gas en route to the beach with some friends, she and Harlan make an instant connection -- so much so that she impulsively invites him along for the ride and he, though it means losing his job, agrees to come.
From there, a star-crossed romance develops, much to the consternation of Tobe's sheriff father, Wade (David Morse), who doesn't buy an inch of Harlan's aw-shucks demeanor or a word of his claim to being a former ranch hand newly arrived from South Dakota.
First indication that Wade may be justified in his suspicions comes when Harlan treats Tobe to a romantic horseback ride on a horse he claims to be borrowing from his friend Charlie (Bruce Dern), only for Charlie to call the police and report the animal stolen before their return. Later, we see Harlan acting out the part of a movie cowboy (complete with two single-action Colt .45s) in front of his motel room mirror -- actions pitched somewhere between innocuous childhood role-playing and Travis Bickel-esque delusion.
But it's only when Harlan treats Tobe's timid younger brother, Lonnie (Rory Culkin), to some impromptu shooting lessons that the love struck young woman begins to question the responsibility of Harlan's actions.
Of course, it's no surprise that Harlan turns out to be something other than what meets the eye, but, as in "Dahmer," Jacobson is less interested in labeling what his protagonist is than in understanding how and why he came to be who he is.
In "Down in the Valley," that investigation yields a complex consideration of the cowboy as nonconformist archetype and the enduring appeal of the gunslinger fantasy in an age when the wide-open spaces of the West have been eaten away by strip malls and tract-house developments.
First hour makes for especially riveting viewing, thanks to the cool confidence of Jacobson's direction and story's unpredictability. In a role that capitalizes on his chameleonic gifts, Norton is superb, projecting some of the lazy sexuality of the young Jeff Bridges in the early courtship scenes and, later, a volatile menace worthy of his own Oscar-nominated turns in "Primal Fear" and "American History X."
Wood is likewise excellent at capturing Tobe's mix of seductive young womanhood and girlish vulnerability. To Jacobson's credit, there's nothing lurid or exploitative about their scenes together, despite the dramatic age difference between the two thesps.
Pic bogs down in its midsection (which could use tightening), including one overly lengthy sequence detailing Harlan's past. And as it enters its final stretch, pic suffers from the obvious payoffs of a few too many Chekovian plants where handguns are concerned, with one character's recovery from a seemingly fatal gunshot wound likely to strike some as a stretch of pic's credibility (though no more so than Barbara Stanwyck's similarly miraculous comeback at the end of "Forty Guns").
Jacobson gets back on track for the finale where "Down in the Valley" reaches its darkly mysterious peak.
Shooting in true anamorphic widescreen with d.p. Enrique Chediak, Jacobson constantly evokes the tension between pic's Western and urban elements: a horseback ride alongside the L.A. river basin; freeway headlights shimmering the way stars once did. There also are direct visual homages to two of Jacobson's acknowledged influences, Howard Hawks' "Red River" and John Ford's "My Darling Clementine."
Despite appearing in the end credits cast list of print screened in Cannes, actress Ellen Burstyn is nowhere to be found in the finished film.

Like Don't Come Knocking , this contrived lament for the lonesome cowboy means to measure what remains of the old western in the absence of the Old West, eventually plopping its displaced ranch hand protagonist onto the fake Main Street of an old western movie set just to make sure we don't miss any of the cine-mythic connotations. Writer-director David Jacobson  (Dahmer ) also cribs freely from a certain archetypal urban oater: Edward Norton 's Stetson-sporting San Fernando Valley  loner takes to twirling his Colt .45 in front of the motel room mirror while, as the unattainable object of his affection, Evan Rachel Wood  effortlessly channels Cybill Shepherd . Stepping out with a weirdo twice her age, Wood's 18-year-old suburban rebel runs afoul of her sheriff stepdad (David Morse ), and no wonder: Even as Jacobson ludicrously twists his hero from aw-shucks-y'all gas pumper to the Max Cady of the Valley and purports to blame power lines and freeways and tract-home developments for the cowboy's undoing, the real culprit, old as the West, is teen female desire.
