         Craig Lucas' "The Dying Gaul" begins promisingly only to lapse into an increasingly improbable and overly familiar tale about how rotten Hollywood industryites can be, as the formidable talents and skills of Patricia Clarkson, Peter Sarsgaard and Campbell Scott actually command attention longer than their material warrants. That Lucas wrote the screenplay for the landmark gay film "Longtime Companion" and that he and Scott collaborated on the distinctive "The Secret Life of Dentists" makes "The Dying Gaul" seem all the more disappointing.
 
  Sarsgaard's aspiring screenwriter Robert is summoned to a meeting at Paramount by Scott's Jeffrey, a smooth-talking producer sufficiently impressed to offer a cool million for Robert's script, "The Dying Gaul." Highly autobiographical, with its title taken from the ancient Roman statue, it is a love story between two men, one dying from AIDS. Only months before Robert lost his lover, who was also his agent.
 


         






    The year is 1995, and there is a catch: Even though Jeffrey says that Gus Van Sant has read "The Dying Gaul" and is also impressed with it, he stipulates that Robert change the dying Maurice to Maggie. Robert reflexively refuses, then thinks about his debts, his son's future and the 15 other scripts that never got made and swiftly capitulates. Jeffrey declares flatly that "Americans hate gays" and that as written "The Dying Gaul" will never, ever be made in Hollywood. While 1995 was not 2005, the year of the upcoming "Brokeback Mountain," there were certainly numerous independent companies a decade ago, including Strand Releasing, which is distributing this film, that would have been interested in Robert's script.
 
  In any event, once Robert signs the contract he is quickly taken up by Jeffrey and his elegant, witty wife Elaine (Clarkson), a former screenwriter, who live in a sterile, ostentatious Malibu palazzo with their two small children. Jeffrey quickly reveals his bisexuality, seducing Robert, while Elaine, adopting a male persona in an online gay chat room, engages Robert in intense conversations, at once tantalizing and disturbing. Lucas adapted his film from his play, and while "The Dying Gaul" may have inspired a willing suspension of disbelief on the stage, it fails to do so on the screen. Why does it never occur to Robert that Elaine is the person sending those messages? That this defies credibility makes it all the more difficult to believe for a moment that Robert, even though grief-stricken and vulnerable, could really believe he might be receiving messages from his dead lover, or that Elaine is oblivious to Jeffrey's bisexuality.
 
  Although "The Dying Gaul" tries to evoke the pathos of Greek tragedy and the stars strive heroically, there's none of the requisite grandeur in this trio of creeps to make it worth caring what happens to them.
 
  *
 
  'The Dying Gaul'
 
 MPAA rating:
 Rated R for sexual content and language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Some sexuality, blunt sexual language and adult themes and situations
 
  A Strand Releasing and Holedigger Studios presentation. Writer-director Craig Lucas; based upon his play. Producers Campbell Scott, George Van Buskirk. Cinematographer Bobby Bukowski. Editor Andy Keir. Music Steve Reich. Costumes Danny Glicker. Production designer Vincent Jefferds. Art director G. Victoria Ruskin. Set decorator Stephanie S. Ziemer. Running time: 1 hour, 45 minutes.
 
  At selected theaters.   

The Dying Gaul , Craig Lucas 's adaptation of his 1998 play, is named for a screenplay (within the screenplay) that's named for a Roman copy of a classical Greek statue. Adding his own drama to this procession of simulacra, Lucas gives a convoluted tale of adultery and cybersex several novel twists. Still, he's too committed to old-fashioned naturalism to send the tale pirouetting into the House of Fiction.
A smooth producer (Campbell Scott ) takes a meeting with a diffident young screenwriter (Peter Sarsgaard ). The screenplay is a tribute to the writer's dead lover. The producer wants to heterosexualize the scenario by changing its AIDS victim from male to female. Will the writer sell out? Are we here to watch a movie?
For his second seduction, the producer aggressively puts the moves on his new employee. Scott's suave powerhouse has already destroyed at least one screenwriter, his wife (Patricia Clarkson ). Instead of writing, she spends her days darting around their Malibu  cliff palace in her bikini. Sarsgaard, an actor who specializes in ambiguity, plays a character who's complicit in his own corruption. The producer takes him to bed even as the unsuspecting wife, who has taken an interest in hubby's protégé, goes trolling for him online. When they meet in cyberspace, she pretends to be a gay man—then, composing her script at last, starts fucking more seriously with the writer's head than the producer could ever imagine.
Entertaining if cornball, lacking the cold-eyed nastiness of something like Mike Nichols 's Closer , The Dying Gaul  is tricked out with strident montage sequences and tremulous Steve Reich  music. It's already drowning in an icky sea of language when Lucas makes a stretch for Greek tragedy and sends the whole Malibu playhouse abruptly crashing down.
