It feels like a long time ago that the BBC first unveiled its "Planet Earth" documentary series  - a stunning achievement five years in the making, with then-groundbreaking nature footage captured by more than 70 photographers fanned out across 62 countries. Since that 2006 debut in the UK, the series has been made available for frequent viewing on American cable television (where Sigourney Weaver replaced original narrator David Attenborough) and as a box set of discs complete with popular behind-the-scenes diaries. Now, just in time for Earth Day 2009, comes "Earth," the big-screen movie version of all that expensive camera work, repackaged by Disney under its new Disneynature label, with narration by James Earl Jones.
This "Earth" doesn't really have anything new to say, but it does present some newly entertaining ways of saying it.
Where the TV series was comprehensive and mostly serious, the movie is far more compact, of course, and considerably lighter in tone. Still, the big-screen journey feels in some ways more urgent, hopping quickly from shrinking polar icebergs to scorching desert sands, lush tropical rain forests, and thundering mountain waterfalls. Plenty of menacing predators roam, but blood and carnage have been edited to a G-rated minimum, which still might prove disturbing to youngsters, even if they're spared the graphic conclusion of lions gang tackling an elephant at night.
Jones's rich, familiar voice slides effortlessly between ominous and playful narration as the film treks all around the globe to document dozens of wild animal species including exotic birds, monkeys, whales, and cats. It's easy to see why some stories and moments made the cut: The poignant tale of a struggling polar bear family plays exceptionally well on the big screen, right from the opening shots of adorable cubs slip-sliding along a steep arctic slope. And can anyone be unimpressed by a great white shark leaping high above the water to snag a seal, or aerial footage of a massive caribou migration with hungry wolves in hot pursuit?
Directors Alastair Fothergill (a creative force behind "The Blue Planet," "Deep Blue," and "Planet Earth") and Mark Linfield aren't out to shake things up too much  - in fact, "Earth" borrows heavily from the (Linfield directed) "Pole to Pole" opening episode of "Planet Earth." Any previously unseen footage seems like a mere footnote to the spectacular images that made the series such a hit.
The message is, as always: Respect the fragile ecosystems of this vast world we merely share in.
If even a few more people are persuaded by James Earl Jones and the power of cinema, this was a film worth making.
.

With its cozy references to animal ''moms'' and ''dads'' and its delicate avoidance of disturbing imagery in the depiction of life and death in the wild, this super-duper deluxe nature documentary (the first title from the new Disneynature label of environmentally conscious crowd-pleasers) clearly aims to recruit young viewers as conservationists. The pitch works for adults, too. Earth , a showpiece from the BBC team that made Planet Earth , is spectacularly photographed, gracefully edited, and effectively matter-of-fact in demonstrating the effects of of climate change. James Earl Jones narrates with the authority of Adam naming the animals. A–
See all current movie reviews from EW

 Leave it to Disney to make global warming as soothing as a full-body massage. In the grandiosely titled “Earth,” plundered largely from the BBC Natural History Unit’s magnificent “Planet Earth,” the filmmakers Alastair Fothergill and Mark Linfield take the temperature of our planet and conclude that it is rising. Blame James Earl Jones’s insistently cozy narration if the film makes that elevation seem as natural a phenomenon as the turning of the tides.  But this is nature defanged and declawed for kiddie consumption, so the emphasis is on awwww-filled moments — mandarin ducklings flapping adorably from nest to forest floor, polar bear cubs slithering on ungainly paws — captured in spectacularly high definition. Even when the fangs are visible (a great white shark gobbling a sea lion in balletic slow motion) the blood is not, thanks to  tasteful and customer-sensitive editing. There are no creepy-crawlies on this earth.  Following the tilt of the planet from pole to pole, “Earth” records the expanding deserts and shrinking rainfalls with well-meaning diligence but without explanation. The plight of the thirsty African elephants (every dehydrated fold lovingly captured) and starving humpbacked whales seems as removed from human action as a solar eclipse.  As a result, you may leave the theater feeling as fuzzy — and ultimately as powerless — as those doomed polar bears.

Not one frame of CGI is used in "Earth," a landmark achievement utilizing the latest tech advances as it follows the cute and cuddly across multiple hemispheres and seasons. A ravishing distillation of the BBC/Discovery series "Planet Earth," docu brings to the large screen memorable images that cried out on TV for the full movie-going experience. Presales back in Berlin went global, with Lionsgate picking up Stateside fall release. Prospects should be big worldwide, though there's always the chance that auds weaned on Animal Planet may decide there's no need to rush to the cinemas.
One look at the number of d.p.s and it's clear the kind of work that went into this, conceived by the same team as landmark underwater docu "Deep Blue" and helmed by Alastair Fothergill and Mark Linfield. Five years in the making, 4,500 days in the field at 200 locations, 250 days of aerial photography: The statistics are more than impressive.
From the sharper than sharp satellite images of the globe to thrilling scenes of a Humpback Whale mother supporting her calf on the ocean surface, "Earth" takes in the full panoply of the planet in a determined reminder, as narrator Patrick Stewart intones, of "what we have, and what we stand to lose."
Docu is unabashedly family-friendly: The producers steered clear of the "Savage Killers in the Wild" type of nature show, refraining from showing even a drop of blood let alone the now customary maulings on the Discovery Channel.
Even when a great white shark lunges for a seal, it swallows the animal whole -- no mess here. Animals are uniformly appealing, and information very basic. While making clear the problems these creatures face thanks to global warming, docu's careful not to sound too gloomy. Although pic is unquestionably let down by the overly bland script, the visuals more than make up for it.
"Earth" covers the seasons, and the planet, in a full year's cycle that begins in the high Arctic in January. Stunning time-lapse photography captures the returning sun and the moment when a polar bear mother and her two cubs exit their den and work off the grogginess of hibernation.
It's not just the proximity to these and other creatures that amazes, but docu's ability to reverse zoom and set the scene in its larger context without losing a drop of clarity.
Aerial shots of the immense taiga forest take one's breath away, as does the camera's accompaniment of Demoiselle cranes in their migration across the Himalayas. North American woodlands are transformed in a few seconds from snow to emerging snowdrops to clusters of daffodils to carpets of bluebells.
Shots of Mandarin Duck chicks leaping down from their nest high in a tree play like the cutest of cartoons, while truly astonishing scenes of a six-plumed bird of paradise performing his dance are so colorful and humorous as to give the dancing hippos of "Fantasia" a run for their money.
Anyone wanting to know how all this was captured will need to watch the fuller TV series, though viewers can hardly take any of the effort for granted, no matter how easy it all appears. Definition is so crystal clear, the colors so true, that anything other than a spotless and seamless screen will be annoying -- docu cries out for complete IMAX treatment.
George Fenton's ultra-rich, majestic score is in keeping with the overall sweep, yet occasionally feels like a parody of the John Williams type of over-sumptuousness.
Camera (color, 35mm, HD-to-35mm), Andrew Anderson, Doug Anderson, Doug Allan, Paul Atkins, Barrie Britton, Richard Burton, Simon Carroll, Rod Clarke, Martyn Colbeck, Justin Evans, Wade Fairley, Ted Giffords, Mike Holding, Michael Kelem, Simon King, Toshihiro Muta, Justin Maguire, Didier Noiret, Andrew Penniket, Rick Rosenthal, Adam Ravetch, Tim Shepherd, Andrew Shillabeer, Peter Scoones, Warwick Sloss, Paul Stewart, Gavin Thurston, Jeff Turner, Nick Turner, John Waters; editor, Martin Elsbury; music, George Fenton; sound (Dolby Digital), Kate Hopkins, Tim Owens; associate producers, Melissa Caron, Amanda Hill. Reviewed at San Sebastian Film Festival (Official Selection), Sept. 22, 2007. Running time: 99 MIN.
Narrator: Patrick Stewart.
 

