 “Easy Virtue,” Stephan Elliott’s carbonated screen adaptation of an early Noël Coward play, is so intent on sustaining a facade of fizzy effervescence that it incorporates bouncy period-style versions of songs by Coward and Cole Porter as a peppy running soundtrack. One character, John Whittaker (Ben Barnes), a dewy English upper-class twit who brings his glamorous, somewhat older new American wife, Larita (Jessica Biel), home to meet his poisonous family, is so enamored of the songs that snippets of the lyrics seep into his dialogue.  It may be a cute device that works for a while, but Mr. Elliott, who wrote the screenplay with Sheridan Jobbins, overuses it in a movie whose breathless, hyperkinetic style harks back to his 1994 comedy, “The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert.” (Since then Mr. Elliott has directed only two features, “Welcome to Woop Woop” and “Eye of the Beholder.”)  This movie’s insistent jazz-age lilt is ultimately at odds with a play written in 1924  that attacks the hypocrisy, smugness and benighted values of the English landed gentry between the wars. The screenplay includes scattered Coward bons mots, but the witticisms don’t come as thick or as fast as in his later plays.  “Easy Virtue” follows the travails of Larita, a brash, beautiful, widowed race-car driver from Detroit whom John meets in Monaco and impulsively marries.  John’s mother, Veronica (Kristin Scott Thomas), is predisposed to loathe her new daughter-in-law. And from the moment Larita steps out of John’s BMW roadster onto the Whittaker estate, she campaigns for Larita’s undoing.  In its cold-eyed assessment of the English aristocracy “Easy Virtue” has none of the lurking Anglophilia found in Merchant-Ivory movies. The interior of the castle on the family’s 400-acre estate is shabby and filled with lumpy furniture that is as ugly as it is uncomfortable looking. Except for a Thanksgiving dinner that Veronica arranges, the food is unappetizing.  Ms. Scott Thomas, deglamorized to play Veronica, is an embittered, snobbish dragon lady who derides Larita as a “floozy.” Larita’s allergy to pollen — she sneezes when given a tour of the castle’s attached greenhouse — symbolizes the unbreachable divide between the two women. Her gift of a Cubist painting turns out to be exactly the wrong present.  Veronica’s husband, Jim (Colin Firth), disheveled and unshaven, spends his days tinkering in his automotive workshop. In the film’s most poignant moment he recalls the slaughter of all the men under his command during World War I. After the war this self-described member of “the romantic lost generation” drifted around France carousing and having affairs.  John, the family’s golden boy, may be charming, but once in the shadow of his possessive mother, his independence and resolve dissipate rapidly. His two dreary sisters, Hilda (Kimberley Nixon) and Marion (Katherine Parkinson), both under Veronica’s thumb, become allies in her campaign to destroy his marriage. The little melodramas that erupt in the Whittaker household loom large. There is an accident involving the family’s Chihuahua for which Larita takes the blame; a local revue in which one daughter, at Larita’s supposed behest, scandalizes the family by dancing a can can without her scanties; a fox hunt in which the ever-spirited Larita, who abhors hunting as a blood sport, rides a motorcycle instead of a horse.  As scandalous secrets are uncovered about Larita’s first marriage to a much older man who died of cancer, her callow young husband, with whom she has a spicy sex life, begins to withdraw. The movie uses ingenious visual symbols —  curved oval mirrors and stuffed animal heads —  to suggest the Whittakers’ warped Victorian values and the deadness of a culture Larita finds unendurable. You wouldn’t want to spend an afternoon with the dull, doughy-looking local gentry who attend the Whittakers’ parties.  If Coward, later in his career, became an eloquent defender of all things English, “Easy Virtue” suggests that the ardent patriotism that took hold in the ’30s and ’40s had yet to assert itself.  The free-spirited Larita —  and by implication, America itself —  represents the brave new future; the Whittakers and all they stand for might as well be extinct.  “Easy Virtue” is rated  PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has sexual situations.

A fine cast makes sure Noel Coward's champagne remains bubbly in "Easy Virtue," an effervescent entertainment that marks a welcome return for "Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" director Stephan Elliott after a nine-year absence. This peppy Ealing Studios offering may have trouble asserting itself in a market that increasingly demands must-see credentials, but with Jessica Biel more than keeping up with such British stalwarts as Kristin Scott Thomas and Colin Firth at snapping out the tasty dialogue, the pic could yet cultivate an audience among those who go for pictures with a smart English pedigree.
For several years it has been clear that Biel is one of the great, beautiful babes of her generation. But if her abilities as a spirited, sharp-witted comedienne with a smart sense of timing had not frequently been demonstrated, it's only because she had seldom been asked to display them. As an adventurous American auto racer confronted with ferocious disapproval from her new English husband's snobbish family in the mid-1920s, Biel sparkles in this fun second film version of Coward's play, after Alfred Hitchcock's melodramatic, and much reworked, 1927 silent version.
Coward's stage piece, which he wrote when he was only 24, was a covert demolition job on the upper middle class of British landed gentry that held on to its Victorian-era morals and attitudes more successfully than it held on to its money after World War I. Elliott and Sheridan Jobbins' adaptation keeps a watchful eye on this and other underlying themes, even as it goofs around with the source in ways meant to mildly modernize its feel, particularly in the musical and wardrobe departments.
Pic takes a reel or so to entirely find its bearings. Larita (Biel), having just finished first in a Monaco auto race, impulsively marries upper-class pretty-boy John Whittaker (Ben Barnes) and accompanies him to his family's country pile. Arriving in a splendid vintage BMW roadster, the couple receive a frosty welcome from John's snooty mother (Scott Thomas), who instantly pegs the fashionable Larita as a "floozy" and launches a systematic campaign to drive her out.
Mr. Whittaker (Firth), a scruffy layabout, takes a much more generous view of his new daughter-in-law, but his wife and their two ugly-princess daughters (Kimberley Nixon, Katharine Parkinson) outnumber him. Larita does her best to ingratiate herself, but the gloves soon come off, with the only question being whether Larita and John's love is strong enough to withstand the onslaught.
What remains unmentioned for quite some time is the Whittakers' increasingly desperate financial straits. Keen to maintain appearances, Mrs. Whittaker holds on to every last scrap of 19th-century class prejudice, even as she's forced to sell some of her property to a neighbor.
The free-spirited Larita is also annoying to the matriarch as a reminder of the fun she missed out on in her own life. The young enchantress spurs regretful nostalgia for spent youth in Mr. Whittaker, too. Firth's moving monologue about losing all the men under his command during the Great War and his self-description as a member of the "romantic lost generation" bring real dimension to his character and explain a lot about the family dynamics.
A running visual metaphor equating the enormous number of dead animals adorning the estate with the rot of the specific social setting sums up Elliott's p.o.v., but remains in the background of the lively repartee, which may only occasionally be hilarious, but is always barbed and well spoken. Scott Thomas gets the lion's share of the savage quips, and sneers them impeccably, even as one eventually comes to understand, if not sympathize with, her reasons for ostracizing Larita. The daughters are amusingly awful creatures, while a sensible neighbor friend, Sarah (Charlotte Riley), who's a more proper mate for John, is portrayed in an agreeably generous light.
Elliott whisks things along at a fast but not frantic pace, and brings it all to the finish line in a fleet 96 minutes. A mild choppiness in the early stretch quickly subsides. The helmer mixes five Coward tunes, as well as three Cole Porter standards, into the busy soundtrack, along with other music new and old; the result is a bit slapdash, but effective overall. Set in slowly tattering luxury, the film boasts bright production values.

Quick! Noël Coward —sage or supercilious bitch? No matter where you stand, Stephan Elliott 's deliciously cheeky screen adaptation of one of the satirist's lesser-known jabs at the British upper crust will charm your pants off. The movie opens with a contemporary rendition of Coward's "Mad About the Boy," impressively sung by Jessica Biel , her customary luminous self as a Roaring Twenties American race car driver who marries into British aristocracy and finds herself on the losing end of a war of words with the groom's mother (Kristin Scott Thomas ). Though Elliott, director of The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert , gussies up the action with clever and lyrical visuals, words are what count in this scantily plotted piece (hard to believe that Hitchcock made a silent  version in 1928), a light variant on Oscar Wilde 's Lady Windermere's Fan  with the same libertarian message that the morally compromised inherit the earth while the self-righteous wither on the vine. A uniformly great cast (Kris Marshall  is a scream as the eye-rolling butler) is upstaged by a hilariously WASP-ish Thomas, who strides away with the movie wearing sensible cardies, QE II  hair, and all the best lines as Mummy Dearest, with Colin Firth  modestly bringing up the rear as her war-ruined lush of a husband. Easy Virtue  may seem like little more than a big, fat mother-in-law joke, but Elliott pointedly recasts it as a nail in the coffin of an increasingly irrelevant gentry.
