         Q. Allan Brocka's "Eating Out" is a slight sex comedy that would work far better on stage than screen, where it seems far too talky and too slow. Brocka would have us believe that Scott Lunsford's Caleb, a Tucson college student, who is notably handsome and unpretentious, just can't get a girl. Caleb is attracted to Gwen (Emily Stiles), who is attracted to gays, so Caleb's gay roommate Kyle (Jim Verraros) suggests that Caleb come on to Gwen's gay roommate Marc (Ryan Carnes). Kyle figures that this will make Gwen attracted to Caleb, and that they will eventually get together, which will allow Kyle to pursue Marc himself. If it were briskly staged under a proscenium, "Eating Out" might just make it as an amusing trifle, but on the big screen it's merely tedious and silly.
 
 "Eating Out." 
Unrated. Blunt sex talk, brief nudity, mild sexuality. 1 hour, 25 minutes. Exclusively at the Regent Showcase, 614 N. La Brea Ave., (323) 934-2944.          ADVERTISEMENT


         






    

n this dreary erotic roundelay, Caleb (Scott Lunsford) is a straight man who likes tough women. Gwen (Emily Stiles) is a straight girl with a taste for gay men. Along with chic apartments and campy vintage outfits, each possesses that ultimate urban accessory: a gay roommate. Insecure, smart-mouthed Kyle (Jim Verraros), who lives with Caleb, is pining away for Gwen's roomie, the hunky musician Marc (Ryan Carnes). When Caleb pretends to be gay to get close to Gwen, confusion reigns, until a virtuosic act of three-way phone sex sets everything, well, straight, and each of the four principals finds love with an object of the appropriate sex. Think of it as a modern-day variant on a Shakespearean comedy, only without the verbal felicity or dramatic structure. "Eating Out" is the feature film debut of the director Q. Allan Brocka, whose series of animated shorts, "Rick & Steve, the Happiest Gay Couple in All the World," concerned the romantic travails of a pair of Lego figures. Mass-produced plastic toys might be more distinguishable from one another than the cast members of "Eating Out," a generic assortment of smooth-skinned gym bunnies who sit around dishing shrill double-entendres and strained banter. The one surprise in the cast is Mr. Verraros, a former contestant on "American Idol," in his first acting role, as the queeny, scheming Kyle. Despite the limitations of the role as written, he has a scrappy energy that sets him apart from the bland and vulgar proceedings. "We're just bodies with organic needs ... we shouldn't deny our bodies," Gwen tells Caleb in one of her many frantic attempts to seduce him over to "the other team" (for which, as it turns out, he was batting all along). In cinema as in life, this kind of biological reductionism sounds better in the abstract than it plays out in practice.

Very much the typically crass teen sex comedy, "Eating Out" is distinguished by its determination to aim genre's conventions toward horndoggery both hetero- and homosexual. That novelty aside, it's par for the course: Rude, heavily contrived, pretty funny, just remotely connected to real-world youth life. Somewhat guilty minor pleasure will work best viewed in the company of rowdy fellow viewers (the younger the better) and many alcoholic beverages. Vidshot production's very modest dimensions suggest small screen as the most natural destination, though limited theatrical exposure isn't out of the question.
Pic begins on a rather gamy note with the attempted "rape" of bossy blonde Tiffani (Rebekah Kochan) by alleged phone repairman Caleb (Scott Lunsford). Turns out it's her sexual fantasy being enacted, and she's fussy enough to fire him as too nice for the role mid-act. Bad-taste humor thus established, pic plunges into a nondescript college atmosphere in which it seems all social boundaries between straights and gays have ceased to exist. Caleb shares an off-campus apartment with gay best friend Kyle (Jim Verranos).
Similarly crossing lines in platonic cohabitation are gorgeous-and-he-knows- it Marc (Ryan Carnes) and pretty, trash-talking Gwen (Emily Stiles). They're in each others' business to such a degree that Gwen not only manages Marc's revolving-door sex life, but seems attracted to men only if they're gay.
Attending a party at latter duo's flat, Caleb catches the hots for Gwen, while Kyle gets cold-shouldered yet again by impossible-dream Marc. Kyle decides the solution to both their problems would be for Caleb to pose as a gay man -- thus Gwen will view him as a potential conquest and Kyle will have more of an excuse to hang around Marc. Trouble is, Marc becomes smitten with this supposedly just-out-of-the-closet new guy, and Gwen encourages that liaison rather than picking up on Caleb herself.
Credibility need not apply as the finale rigs an all's-well pairing-off between the sex-preference-appropriate parties. However, given Gwen's shallow, insensitive behavior right up to the end, one might question just how this constitutes a "happy ending" for Caleb, even in silly wish-fulfillment terms.
Graduating to features after some well-received shorts, Brocka (nephew of late leading Philippines helmer Lino) has perhaps over-hedged his bets by making nearly every line a quip, to variable results. Sitcom-ish tenor is furthered by frantic pacing, few (mostly interior) locations and over-reliance on close-ups. Characters are scarcely lent any depth, though lead thesps manage well enough. Support roles tend to be shrilly conceived and played.
Nonetheless, within the terms of broad, even crude comedy the pic sets for itself, "Eating Out" is funny more often than not, hilarious on occasion, particularly during one set-piece in which Gwen via cell phone talks Caleb through his first gay sexual experience -- the effect being psychologically hetero and physically homo.
Tech aspects are smooth given the evidently minimal budget.
Camera (color, HD DV), Keith J. Duggan; editor, Phillip J. Bartell; music, Dominik Hauser; production designer, Melissa Fischer; costume designer, David Devincenzo; sound, Michael Cottrell; assistant director, Scott Findley; casting, Don Carroll, Cathy Reinking. Reviewed at San Francisco Lesbian & Gay Film Festival, June 20, 2004. Running time: 90 MIN.

 


IN SATMAR CUSTODY    Written and directed by Nitzan Gilady   April 6 through 12, Two Boots Pioneer
These days, on the sidewalks of leafy enclaves in upstate New York , bearded men sporting black hats and long, curling side locks pass women with covered heads pushing old-fashioned prams. The scene, straight from some shtetl described by Isaac Bashevis Singer , conceals a contemporary tragedy of ancient Greek proportions in director Nitzan Gilady's chilling and thoroughly engrossing documentary In Satmar Custody .
Gilady, a secular Israeli of Yemeni origin, disguised himself as a Hasidic Jew to film a fervently anti-Zionist, ultra-orthodox Satmar sect, who recruit new members among Yemen 's impoverished Jewish community. A young Yemeni couple, Yahia and Lauza Jaradi, heeds the call, with disastrous results. Stranded upstate, fed gefilte fish, taught only Yiddish and Torah, the Yemenis find themselves culturally adrift. One day, an accident lands the Jaradis' youngest daughter in the hospital; after allegations of abuse, all five of their children are removed and placed with Satmar families.
Gilady builds the tension as in a noir thriller, with haunting music, lots of night scenes, and men in dark coats shot from low angles and car windows. Yahia wanders about, seeking clues to his life's unraveling, as the community's crude manipulations become increasingly clear. Lauza, the bereft mother, remains a mystery worthy of Dostoyevsky or Flaubert. Gilady's film would like to absolve her (and to a large extent it does), but it leaves behind a perhaps more disturbing question: What is left of a person whose points of reference have all been taken away?

HAPPILY EVER AFTER    Written and directed by Yvan Attal    Kino, opens April 8, Paris Theatre
If there is any doubt as to whether French cinema is in a state of free fall, Yvan Attal's Happily Ever After  should put such uncertainties to rest. This would-be comedy about a thirtysomething family man (Attal) and his foray into infidelity is probably the worst in the putrid bushel of recent Gallic imports. Whiny and petulant, Attal's bourgeois schmuck sure has a lot to complain about: a svelte wife (real-life spouse Charlotte Gainsbourg ) who graciously tolerates his kvetching, an exceedingly well-behaved tot, and a job as a luxury-car salesman that apparently permits ample time off. Adultery tempts both husband and wife—he acts on it, she doesn't—and the resulting rounds of shrill soul-searching quickly crescendo to an earsplitting cacophony. As an actor, Attal is comically tone-deaf, flailing about like an attention-starved baby. As a director, he's a hack for whom subtlety is anathema. (A third-act reconciliation cues "Can't Help Falling in Love.") Always a fascinating screen presence, Gainsbourg has more to do than in Attal's previous solipsism-fest My Wife Is An Actress , but she's again stuck playing the marble goddess opposite her hubby's schlub. The more Attal insists on his inferiority, the greater his narcissism grows. Happily Ever After  is almost worth sitting through for cameos by Anouk Aimée  and Johnny Depp —two consummate actors whose near wordless scenes are like oases of calm amid the self-important chatter.
