 It’s not often filmmakers are thoughtful enough to include a critique of their work in the title, so for that, at least, the creators of “Eating Out 2: Sloppy Seconds” are to be commended. But in case avid fans of the first opus require further enticement, you should know the slop in question is both pervasive and highly visible.  A Rubik’s Cube of shifting sexual orientation and elaborate sex fantasies, “Sloppy Seconds” gathers all the accouterments of soft pornography — cheesy music, low-rent acting and attractively framed genitals — into a plot of stunning imbecility. When the insecure Kyle (Jim Verraros) is casually dumped by his narcissistic boyfriend, Marc (Brett Chukerman), he seeks comfort with the best friends Gwen (Emily Brooke Hands) and Tiffani (Rebekah Kochan). It’s safe to say neither woman would be your mother’s first choice for daughter-in-law.  While Gwen hunts for “a little boy-on-boy” action to increase her viewing pleasure, and Tiffani just hunts, Kyle homes in on a sexually ambivalent nude model named Troy (Marco Dapper), a molded lump of muscle and tan lines with no more brain power than is strictly necessary to achieve orgasm. In hopes of seeing more of Troy than is currently available in art class, Kyle pretends to be an “ex-gay” and invites him to a meeting of Homo No More, a group whose mission is to stop the spread of homosexuality.  As its title suggests, “Eating Out 2: Sloppy Seconds” is less about sexual confusion than sexual gluttony. With its jauntily crass aesthetic and wine-waiter line readings, the movie is most focused in its zeal to show the fruitlessness of right-wing efforts to reorient gay men. To that end, the support-group scenes are amusingly dimwitted, and the legendary Mink Stole (still game after 40 years in the business) gives her all as Kyle’s ebullient, gay-friendly mother.  The other women fare less well under Phillip J. Bartell’s direction and a script, by Mr. Bartell and Q. Allan Brocka, that sags with sexual explicitness. “Did my vagina scare you away?” asks a perplexed Tiffani. Perhaps we should ask the audience fleeing the theater.

The horny gay and straight young folks from "Eating Out" continue to crack wise and sniff out partners in "Eating Out 2: Sloppy Seconds" -- and the filmmaking continues to be just as sloppy. Sequel is no more than a cheapo campy goof, but this edition does contain a higher quota of laugh lines and an unsubtle message that efforts to make gay youth "go straight" is destined to fail. Original's popularity in vid seems certain to extend to this follow-up, now having a modest spin around gay and lesbian fests.
Dumped by b.f. Marc (Brett Chukerman), Kyle (Jim Verraros, reprising his role from the previous pic) is turned on by the new male model in his art class, Troy (Marco Dapper). Troy claims to be hetero, but Kyle and gal pals Gwen (Emily Brooke Hands) and slutty Tiffani (Rebekah Kochan) aren't so sure. To test Troy's leanings, Kyle takes him to a "going straight" session that provides the pic with broad satirical targets. Gay cinema favorites such as Mink Stole add to the party atmosphere, and thesps have fun even if they confuse reciting lines with acting.
Camera (color, DV), Lisa Wiegand; editors, Bartell, Scott Hatcher; music, Boris Worister, Cary Berger; production designer, Michael Fitzgerald; art director, Rodrigo Cabral; costume designer, Lara Cilento. Reviewed at Outfest, Los Angeles, July 13, 2006. Running time: 78 MIN.
 


If American Pie  could spawn a sequel, so can Eating Out , Q. Allan Brocka 's queen-teen sex farce from '05. As its subtitle suggests, this quickie follow-up pretty much makes the most of filling the same Q-cinema void: Once again yummy American Idol   alum Jim Verraros  plays along with the notion of swinging both ways. The catch in this case is farm boy Troy  from Troy, Illinois, though jock-supporting players include, as end credits have it, Very Hot Guy, Hot Shirtless Guy, Hot Clothed Guy, and Hot Surfer Guy. Well, are you in or out? As before, the fun is somewhat capped by absurdly stilted acting and daytime-soap-quality DV, but the nonstop sub-Araki glibbage (e.g., "I'm so Googling you," "Why are you being all Fiona Apple ?") is plenty peppy and so is Rebekah Kochan 's ding-a-ling Tiffani, a dead ringer for 90210 's Tori Spelling . As Troy, Marco Dapper  has a full-frontal scene of impressive length, and while the climax of this 78-minute comedy isn't perhaps as porno-orgiastic as one would hope, it comes, let's say, not a moment too soon.
