 There are six principal characters in “The Edge of Heaven”: two mothers, two daughters, a father and a son, all arranged in more or less symmetrical pairs. In the course of this extraordinary film by the German writer-director Fatih Akin (which won the best screenplay award in Cannes last year) children are lost, lost parents are never found, and generational and geographical distances grow wider.  Yet at the same time, as the lives of the characters cross and entwine, there is a sense of human connections becoming stronger and thicker, of a fragile moral order coalescing beneath the randomness and cruelty of modern life. And even as the movie bristles with violence — accidental and systematic, sexual and political — its tone is curiously gentle.  At the beginning, Yeter (Nursel Kose), a Turkish woman who works as a prostitute in Bremen, Germany, is confronted by two menacing enforcers of Islamic morality, who demand that she renounce her sinful ways. “I repent,” she says through gritted teeth, and though her words are more a rebuke than an apology, they establish one of Mr. Akin’s themes. Toward the end of the film, Yeter’s daughter, Ayten (Nurgul Yesilcay), is confronted by Susanne (Hanna Schygulla), a German woman (the mother of Ayten’s lover, Lotte) who has suffered a terrible loss, brought about partly by Ayten’s actions. Speaking no German, Ayten tries to express her overwhelming remorse in rudimentary English. “Forgiven” is the only word she can find, as if she is offering absolution instead of asking for it.  That compassion does not always come easily or express itself clearly is one of Mr. Akin’s central insights. He is generous with his characters, even at their worst, but he also regards them with a measure of detachment as their good intentions go astray and their bad impulses bear terrible fruit. Similarly, while he is acutely aware of viciousness, injustice and hypocrisy in both Turkey (where his parents were born) and his native Germany, his camera absorbs the authentic beauty in both countries, from tidy Bremen to pulsing Istanbul to the tea-covered hillsides and fishing villages of the Black Sea coast.  “The Edge of Heaven” is firmly rooted in these places, manifesting a local knowledge that quietly demolishes received ideas about East and West. Nejat (Baki Davrak), whose father, Ali (Tuncel Kurtiz), emigrated from Turkey, is a professor of German literature, giving lectures on Goethe to sleepy college students. He is presented not as a symbol of assimilation or deracination, but as a person more or less comfortable with himself. The same cannot be said for Lotte (Patrycia Ziolkowska). Her mix of childish impulsiveness and half-baked idealism puts her at odds with her mother, Susanne, a former hippie whose accommodation to respectable middle-class life drives Lotte crazy.  Lotte is immediately smitten with Ayten, who has fled to Germany to escape the Turkish police. It is not hard to see why. The prospect of helping a radical fugitive from an exotic country appeals to Lotte’s sense of political drama, to be sure, but Ms. Yesilcay’s charisma transcends ideology. With her high, wide-set cheekbones and prizefighter’s hunch (she reminded me a little of Michelle Rodriguez in “Girlfight”), Ayten has a sexual magnetism that is both glamorous and predatory. Of course Lotte risks everything — her mother’s love, her safety, her life — to help Ayten. Who wouldn’t?  If I resist saying much more about what happens in “The Edge of Heaven,” it’s not for fear of giving anything away. Mr. Akin provides his own spoilers in the form of chapter titles that announce the deaths of certain characters before we have even met them. Rather than dissipate the suspense, though, these disclosures intensify it by adding an element of dread. And the shape of the narrative, a mutation of the now-pervasive “Babel” model of braided, chronologically decentered storytelling, allows for plenty of surprises and revelations.  But the main revelation is the film itself. Mr. Akin’s previous fictional feature, “Head-On,” was a tour de force, driven by rage and sexual desire, that traveled over similar cultural and geographical terrain at ferocious velocity. “The Edge of Heaven” has a wider scope and a more contemplative, deliberate mood, and if it doesn’t match the brutal impact of “Head-On” it has a cumulative power, both intellectual and emotional, of its own. By the end you know the characters in it so well that you can’t believe you’ve seen the movie only once, yet on a second viewing it seems completely new. And that may be because the world they inhabit is immediately recognizable — until we get to heaven, it’s where we live — and like no place you’ve been before.

The point at which a good director crosses the career bridge to become a substantial international talent is vividly clear in "The Edge of Heaven," an utterly assured, profoundly moving fifth feature by Fatih Akin. Superbly cast drama, in which the lives and emotional arcs of six people -- four Turks and two Germans -- criss-cross through love and tragedy takes the German-born Turkish writer-director's ongoing interest in two seemingly divergent cultures to a humanist level that's way beyond the grungy romanticism of his 2003 "Head-On" or the dreamy dramedy of "In July" (2000). Robust upscale biz looks a given.
Pic opens and closes in Turkey during a bayram
, the word for a festival or holiday regardless of national or religious differences. First seen tooling around the Black Sea coast, Hamburg U. prof Nejat (Baki Davrak) is next seen arriving in nearby Bremen, where his father, sprightly septuagenarian Ali (Tuncel Kurtiz), still visits hookers as a cure for his loneliness.
Happening upon a no-nonsense Turkish prostie, Yeter (Nursel Kose), he proposes she moves in with him if he matches her hooking income. Under pressure to quit her job by two fundamentalist Turkish thugs, Yeter agrees.
Turns out that, back in Turkey, Yeter has a 27-year-old daughter, Ayten (Nurgul Yesilcay), who thinks her mom works in a shoe shop. When Ali is hospitalized after a heart attack, Yeter forms a close relationship with the quiet Nejat, who accepts his father's patriarchal lifestyle.
However, viewers have already been warned, in pic's opening title ("Yeter's Death"), that tragedy is waiting round the corner. Sure enough, Yeter is accidentally killed by Ali in an argument. As Ali is incarcerated in a German jail and Yeter's body is shipped home, story shifts to Istanbul, where Nejat has bought a German-language backstreets bookshop. Between times, he's searching for Ayten, to finance her education as a form of reparation.
As another audience warning ("Lotte's Death") appears on screen 40 minutes in, we meet Ayten, a political activist using the alias Gul Korkmaz who's on the run from the authorities. Fleeing to Germany, she ends up penniless in Hamburg where she's befriended by college student Lotte, daughter of comfy, middle-class Susanne (vet Hanna Schygulla). Lotte and Ayten become lovers, setting in motion a complex series of criss-crossing events that changes the lives of the survivors for ever as the story shifts back to Turkey.
Pic has a lean, almost procedural style, in which every scene and  line of dialogue counts. Akin doesn't try to hide the plot's coincidences or Swiss watch-like precision, which is given human resonance by the flawless playing of the six leads. Only one scene, a political face-off by Ayten and Susanne, rings awkwardly.
By the time the second seg segues into the final one (film's German title, "From the Other Side"), helmer's long-burn approach packs a considerable emotional wallop in a quiet, inclusive way.
Veteran Turkish actor Kurtiz, who's almost a national monument back home, dominates the early going with his frisky but deeply traditional Ali. Distaffers take over the running in the second half, with the utterly convincing Yesilcay (so good in the very different role of a quiet Moslem bride in recent Turkish pic "Adam & the Devil") and Ziolkowska (from Akin's "Solino") as the lesbian lovers. Schygulla's low-key perf grows more slowly, bringing a reconciliatory glow to the final reels.
Akin's cultural ease with both countries shows in the shooting, spread between Bremen, Hamburg, Istanbul and Trabzon. Good-looking but never gratuitously glossy lensing by Rainer Klausmann ("Solino," "Head-On," "Downfall") is an extra plus, as is the liberating score by Shantel (aka Stefan Hantel). 


The Edge of Heaven  disembarks stateside still flush from an award-reaping Eurasian tour. That the European Film Awards tossed Fatih Akin 's intercontinental, cross- cultural ensemble piece a Best Screenplay statuette makes perfect sense—it's not brilliant, but it wears current events on its sleeve, feeling out the state of German-Turkish relationships as the former Ottomans clean house for E.U. membership, and the demographic earthquake of 70 million Muslims waits at Europe's door.
Examining a Europe whose increasingly porous borders have drastically undermined a longstanding homogeneity is at the center of excellent recent work by Austria 's Ulrich Seidl  (Import/Export ) and Britain's Shane Meadows  (Somers Town  ). Both films still await a proper U.S. release date, while writer-director Akin once again secures distribution (as he did for his punk-posturing 2004 Head-On ) with pseudo-provocations and a superficially deceptive simulacra of Art.
Edge of Heaven  ups the ambition—its screenplay is a Dickensian network of happenstance, serving to intertwine six characters of different ages, nationalities, and castes. Nejat (Baki Davrak) was born of Turkish stock, but is otherwise completely assimilated into German culture (the character's background echoes the director's). By dint of education, he's been alienated from his working-class father, Ali (Tunçel Kurtiz), a pensioner who arrived with an earlier wave of Gastarbeiter  immigrants. Now comfortably indoctrinated in the pants-pissing- drunk leisure life of Deutschland's underclass, Ali gets the generation gap gaping by introducing the kid to his new fortysomething girlfriend, Yeter (Nursel Köse), a practitioner from the red-light district who dad's hired as a live-in screw.
Yeter's been hooking to support her daughter, a collegiate Commie in Istanbul . Ayten (Nurgül Yesilçay) is introduced running from the cops during the fallout of a turbulent May Day demonstration. Gone on the lam, Ayten makes it to Hamburg  on a fake passport; trying to hustle a cheap meal at the campus commissary there, she latches onto Lotte (Patrycia Ziolkowska), who, as it happens, is a sucker for renegade romance, and Ayten gladly slips into love with her protectress. All this to the (barely) choked-back chagrin of Lotte's single mother (Antitheater vet Hanna Schygulla ), who has to turn her suburban home into a safe house for her daughter's human-rights project/girlfriend.
Juggling the cast, Akin manufactures suspense by teasing close-call missed connections and foretelling the deaths of key characters with on-screen chapter titles. Scenes are identifiably counterbalanced, and this emphasizing of parallels makes the movie superficially impressive. Lesser matters—say, the grunt work inside of scenes—don't get the same attention. Nor do the actors get much help in asserting their human specificity over their diagrammatic function as "types," especially Schygulla, who's just here to bring the heft of her artistic history to her generational-placeholder part. (Now a stern hausfrau , Lotte's mom was once a freewheeling child of the '60s, wouldn't you know.)
The lighting is harsh and unseductive; this signifies "realism." The schematic, pick-a-frame-and-stick-with-it style that's become the fallback technique for highbrow Euro imports comprises much of the film. When two countrymen accost Yeter on a bus, there's no attempt to bring out the sense of physical imposition. And when Schygulla goes on a hotel- room bender, the abject force of her grief might threaten to rent open Akin's delicate construction—so we're kept at a safe distance, observing the action from an on-high security-camera angle. There's nothing inherently wrong with detachment, but these gestures seem arbitrary, especially as the film's pretense of rigor gives way to a humanistic foot rub.
After swatting at and then maneuvering the plot past some real issues relating to Turkey 's E.U. application—the German legal system's treatment of political exiles, Turkish repression, revolutionary irresponsibility—it's time to let the healing begin. Three parent-child sets fracture, then recombine. This expression of growth-through-trauma mostly involves actors hugging and making wistful expressions. (Everyone gets along. That the Turks believe in a different God than the Germans, and actually believe  at that, is apparently not a pressing concern.) If the united Europe aspires to compete with America globally, this is good news—they've found their own Paul Haggis !
