
A man's descent from upstanding citizen to violent sociopath is traced in "Edmond," cult director Stuart Gordon's screen adaptation of David Mamet's 1982 one-act play. With a screenplay by Mamet himself, pic offers a faithful re-creation of the stage version's two-dozen brief encounters between its eponymous protagonist and an assortment of lowlifes, until the line separating law-abider from the law-breaker becomes irreversibly blurred. But despite agreeably short running time and committed perfs, "Edmond" is rendered inert by its stagy atmosphere and failure to fully mine the depths of its protagonist's complex psyche. Pic's pedigree and name cast should ensure numerous fest appearances. Subject matter and aggressively unpleasant tone will keep commercial audiences at bay. 
Set mostly over the course of one long night, pic begins with businessman Edmond Burke (William H. Macy) walking home through the streets of an unnamed urban metropolis. On this particular evening, he feels compelled to stop for a consultation with a storefront fortune teller, who tells Edmond, "You are not where you belong" -- words that will echo in the character's mind and inform all of his subsequent actions.
Arriving at home, Edmond enters into a brief argument with his wife (Mamet's own wife, Rebecca Pidgeon) about a broken lamp, tells her he's never loved her and leaves.
A subsequent encounter with a stranger (Joe Mantegna) in a bar seems to crystallize all that has been subconsciously gnawing at Edmond. As the stranger prattles on about how "niggers" have it easy because "there are certain responsibilities they've never accepted," Edmond realizes he feels emasculated and hidebound by his comfortable (and very white) upper-middle-class existence.
But as he soon finds, resolving to indulge in life's lurid pleasures is easier said than done: As he journeys through a series of back-alley peep-shows and "leisure clubs," he keeps balking at the price tags on the human merchandise. "It's too much" becomes his constant refrain. Yet, before the night is over, he will have committed murder.
In its portrayal of ordinary madness and rage against the societal machine, "Edmond" carries echoes of everything from "American Psycho" to "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde," and there can be no denying that longtime Mamet associate Macy is perfectly cast as the meek everyman coming to terms with his inner aggressor. It's an emotionally (and, at one point, literally) naked performance.
The problem is that, too often, we don't fully understand what motivates Edmond, and many of Mamet's efforts toward explanation -- that life is one big shell game, that we're all latent racists at heart -- feel like specious armchair philosophizing. As a result, the film's orgy of unpleasantness comes to seem largely a provocation without context.
A veteran stage director who helmed the original production of Mamet's "Sexual Perversity in Chicago," Gordon is better known these days for his film work, including the diabolical H.P. Lovcraft adaptation "Re-Animator" (1985) and the lovely children's musical "The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit" (1998). In "Edmond," he creates a couple of genuinely tense, unnerving sequences -- the best of which is a long conversation, shot mostly with a handheld camera, between Edmond and the comely young waitress (Julia Stiles) who ill-advisedly invites him back to her apartment. As in nearly all of the films that Mamet has himself directed based on his own work, however, the airlessness of the material, coupled with the repetitive drone of the syncopated dialogue, tries the patience of all but a select minority of viewers.
Shot quickly on a tight schedule, pic doesn't conceal its low budget as craftily as earlier Gordon pics, with Denis Maloney's gauzy, overly diffuse lighting a particular distraction.

An act of due homage and genuflection to David Mamet  the '70s–'80s theatrical provocateur (not Mamet the '90s–'00s screenplay doodler), the filmization of his 1983 one-act play Edmond   is a pleasant actor's spectacle, oldfangled and splenetic and self-conscious. You never have to get involved; like so much of Mamet's stagecraft, it plays out flashily but at a moral remove, and an audience's response is kept to variations on freeway rubbernecking. The red-eyed efforts at mugging taboos (racism, misogyny) are more to the point than any ostensible statement the narrative could express.
The titular hero (William H. Macy ) is a nondescript businessman who impulsively gets a doomy tarot reading off the street and then essentially drops out of his life and marriage (to Mrs. Mamet, Rebecca Pidgeon , who has one small scene and ka-chings it good). From there, he enters the free-for-all night world of masculine indulgence, but with too little money in his pocket and too little experience. His confrontations are schematic but filled with texture, and the Mametology of the semi-secret fringes finds ground in several familiar bullrings: strip club, bar, whorehouse, one-night-stand flat, pawn shop, back alley. The guest list is an enthused roster of Chicago theater vets, Mamet alumni, and apparent fans, including Joe Mantegna  (a philosophical bigot), George Wendt  (a knife dealer), Julia Stiles  (a luckless waitress), Debi Mazar  (a bordello clerk), Lionel Mark Smith  (a wallet-snatcher, and a producer on the film), Mena Suvari  (a masseuse/whore), Denise Richards  (a B-girl), etc. Director Stuart Gordon  himself, though more famous for his outrageous Lovecraft adaptations from the mid '80s, is a longtime Mamet toiler with Chicago's Organic Theater. Still, despite the hammy cutaways to tarot portents, his enlistment for Edmond  seems peculiar—that is, until we reach halftime, when the scenario goes freaky crimson with stage blood and exploding psychosis.
Writing the screenplay, Mamet hasn't made much effort to update the material; there's even a three-card monte game. But Macy's  clueless every-schmuck is never less than an entertaining sputter, graduating from dim irritation ("That's too much!" he whines again and again when he's told how much sex of various kinds will cost) to racist fury and beyond. It's a subtle bolero, even if the crack-up's peak involves an emergence of white-supremacist bloodlust that seems also dated and arbitrary (since most of his problems so far have been with women). Edmond  isn't a message piece but another, lesser chapter in Mamet's war-chant requiem for the American male's lost purpose and sense of self. As always, the dialogue has an enthralling, insistent edge to it (Mamet's repetitive use of the word "yes," as a response, is the style's attitude in a nutshell: civil yet cold-blooded, frank yet secretive). As the full-length sorta-satire it has become, Edmond  is all sizzle and little meat, a veritable tangent act dropped from Glengarry Glen Ross  because it was several marks too silly.
