
A fairly conventional heartwarmer, lifted by likable performances, good-looking production values and (for movie buffs) a story centered on an outdoor cinema in rural China, "Electric Shadows" is a good example of accessible Mainland cinema that deserves distribution beyond fests. "Cinema Paradiso"-like story, stretching from the Cultural Revolution to the present day, has enough cultural hooks to attract upscale auds in any country, and debuting writer-director Xiao Jiang shows she has the makings of a quality mainstream filmmaker.
Thirty-two-year-old Xiao Jiang ("Little River") -- nom de plume of Jia Yan -- graduated from Beijing Film Academy in the mid-'90s and worked extensively in TV, including writing and directing three TV movies. With its copious extracts from and references to classic movies and stars, "Electric Shadows" is a love letter to an age when cinema was still the main source of mass entertainment in China, and movie theaters (especially in rural areas) a social center for the whole community.
Refreshingly, pic doesn't adopt a patronizing tone toward either the period or the movies, nor become embroiled in the politics. Through a teasing story mixing flashbacks with the present, helmer communicates her real affection for the art and the era, through characters of roughly her own age.
Mao Dabing (local star Xia Yu), an easygoing film buff, works delivering water bottles in Beijing. One day after he accidentally crashes his bike in an alley, he's suddenly brained with a brick by a disturbed young woman, Ling-ling (Qi Zhongyang), who also trashes his bike.
Arrested by the police, Ling-ling remains silent, but she gives Dabing the key to her apartment, asking him to feed the fish. Her place turns out to be a shrine to the movies, and especially to one star, legendary '30s singer-actress Zhou Xuan (best known to Western auds for the 1937 classic, "Street Angel"). As Dabing reads her private diary, pic flashbacks to Ningxia province in the early '70s, and the story of Ling-ling's mom, Jiang Xuehua (Jiang Yihong, quietly dignified).
It's the middle of the Cultural Revolution, and the young, attractive Xuehua works for a radio station in an unnamed country town. Ambitious to become a singer and film star like Zhou -- an impossible dream at the time -- she's abandoned by her lover and gives birth to Ling-ling during an outdoor screening of an Albanian movie ("Victory Over Death"). She's subsequently branded a counter-revolutionary.
After the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976, the young Ling-ling (Guan Xiaotong) grows up surrounded by movies, as her mom is befriended by kindly Pan (Li Haibin), the local theater owner-cum-projectionist. The young girl also pals up with a scruffy young ruffian, Xiaobing (scene-stealing Wang Zhengjia), who, to Ling-ling's distress, is finally sent away to live with his grandfather in Anhui province.
The various scenes of the tykes fooling around, and the evolution of the de facto family of four, are handled with a real charm that avoids sentimentality. Story gets more complicated during flashbacks to the '80s, when Pan and the mother eventually marry, have a son, and the teenage Ling-ling (Zhang Yijing), now an aspiring performer, is forced to take second place. Reading the diaries, Dabing has now realized who Ling-ling really is.
Tech package of the Hong Kong co-production is smooth throughout, with warm lensing and scoring. However, in what must be a first for a foreign-lingo movie, the English subtitler receives a jolting, five-second solo card prior to the end crawl -- the biggest and longest credit of all, including the director's. Chinese title means "A Childhood Dreaming of Movies."
Camera (color), Yang Lun, Chen Hong; editor, Lei Qin; music, Zhao Lin; art director, Fu Delin; costumes, Yu Baonian; assistant director, Li Kai; sound, Li Zhe. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Discovery), Sept. 12, 2004. (Also in Vancouver, Pusan film festivals.) Running time: 99 MIN.
 


"It's like spending the whole night dreaming," muses the oafish protagonist of the new Chinese film Electric Shadows —he's talking about buy-one-ticket, all-night movie houses, but it's an indication of his innocent dimness that he could be talking about sleep as well. Xiao Jiang 's debut film is also verily intoxicated with movieness—the very hyperbolic daydream we're watching, and film history as experienced in the semi-developed, post–Cultural Revolution townships. Ripe and mushy as an October peach, the movie unabashedly fetishizes the old-school, Cinema Paradiso –ized magic of kino-kino-kino, from the hypnotic swatches of Chinese and Albanian (!) propaganda dramas to the simple fact of an outdoor theater (really, a sheet stretched on a village square), waiting for the sunset to come and go. It's the kind of film in which the hand-rewinding of film reels is an act of courtship.
The first movie nut we meet, a guileless delivery boy (Xia Yu ), has nothing on the second: a mute girl (Qi Zhongyang) he collides with by chance, whose apartment, we soon learn, is a bijou shrine to Chinese movie stars, and whose diary unfolds into the movie's sigh-heavy, all-nougat center. The generational mini-saga begins with her starstruck mother (Jiang Yihong ), a dogged showbiz wannabe, getting pregnant and being ostracized as a slut by the provincials; still, with her new daughter in tow, the infatuation with movies takes root as a lifestyle, and the local projectionist (Li Haibin ) becomes a family confidante. Resist if you can (and you can't if you have kids) the scene in which the pint-size heroine is told that a matinee idol is her real father, and a snippet of 35mm celluloid is handed to her as proof and for safekeeping.
Better yet—and far more fascinating than the eventual detours into serendipitous melodrama Xiao takes—is the sensational performance of little Wang Zhengjia  as a snot-nosed, delinquent abuse-magnet our heroine befriends. He doesn't last long enough in Xiao's frothy tale, which goes oddly tragic without him. Electric Shadows  is committed to movies-as-escape swoonery, but the script's late disasters are also predicated on cinema and filmgoing, suggesting an ambivalence the rest of the film seems oblivious to. For every privileged moment (mother and daughter dancing in a yard of screen-like sheets hanging in the breeze), there's a death or sociopathic act that says movies can ruin your life.
