It's a tribute to Emmanuel Ofosu Yeboah that he survives being sanctified in ''Emmanuel's Gift" and emerges with strength, charisma, and humanity intact. Directed in the breathless inspirational tones of an infomercial, the film's an acceptable document of a thoroughly remarkable individual.
Yeboah had the bad luck to be born with a deformed leg in Ghana, where being disabled is worse than bad karma and slightly less than a sin. Disease and lack of health care have resulted in 10 percent of the country's population born with disabilities; the ones not abandoned at birth are treated as second-class citizens and forced to beg in the streets.
Yeboah said no. A brass-tacks self-motivator, he taught himself to ride a bicycle one-legged and pedaled 380 miles across Ghana to raise awareness of what people like him can do. Along the way he became a star, with his progress reported in the media and the entire country rooting for him.
This is where Lisa Lax and Nancy Stern's film properly begins. The folks at San Diego's Challenged Athletes Foundation, to whom Emmanuel applied for his mountain bike, are so taken with him that in 2002 they fly him to America to participate in the 53-mile bicycle portion of the San Diego Triathlon Challenge. There he meets Jim McLaren, who has come back from two devastating accidents to be an athletic competitor, and Rudy Garcia-Tolsen, an astonishing 14-year-old who lost his legs at age 5 and now races on what look like cybernetic stilts.
With Tolsen-Garcia shoring up his confidence, Yeboah undergoes surgery in California and is fitted for a prosthetic leg; his arrival at Ghana airport, in trousers and standing tall, is greeted by family and friends as the miracle it is. At last Emmanuel's real work can begin: overturning his country's ingrained cultural and governmental discrimination against the disabled.
Slickly overdirected, ''Emmanuel's Gift" isn't great filmmaking. Oprah Winfrey's narration has the rushed feel of someone late for her next appointment and the directors don't show us Yeboah's life so much as constantly tell us how wonderful he is. It feels almost accidental when, toward the end of the film, we realize this man has become not only a cultural hero but a civic leader, meeting with Kofi Annan, setting up a foundation to fund schooling for disabled kids, pushing through wheelchair access in his home village, and gently browbeating bureaucrats into admitting that (in the words of one) ''we may have underestimated the urgency of the matter."
Emmanuel even forgives his father for abandoning the family. Come to think of it, maybe the man is a saint. He's certainly more three-dimensional than the film through which we meet him.


An Oprah Winfrey special elevated by Samson Chan's gorgeous digital cinematography, "Emmanuel's Gift" will bowl auds over with its emotion-laden story of a young man from Ghana born with a deformed leg who grows up to be an athlete and national hero. Winfrey herself narrates, and the entire enterprise directed by Lisa Lax and Nancy Stern is a sincere but fairly soft piece of ennobling journalism that gives a positive spin to some of Africa's seemingly intractable problems. Fests will line up for screenings, while cable is a likely harbor for wider viewing.
Twenty-seven-year-old Emmanuel Ofosu Yeboah is introduced as a standard-bearer for the disabled in Ghana, where ancient ways hold that anyone born with deformities is cursed and should not be helped. Emmanuel's mission is to ride a bike -- on one healthy leg and another prosthetic leg -- across his country "to alter perceptions" about the disabled.
Rewinding to his past, viewers learn Emmanuel's father Dickson left the family after the boy was born, which was the start of Emmanuel's problems, including discrimination at school and being banned from the soccer team.
Docu never really explores what made Emmanuel strive for success, what made him different from Ghana's 2 million-plus disabled, many of them unemployed and on the desperate margins of the capital city of Accra. However, Emmanuel came into contact with a global network of support for disabled athletes when he wrote to the California-based Challenged Athletes Foundation with a simple request for a bike.
Competing in marathons and gaining fame for his rise from utter poverty, Emmanuel is seen as a messenger of hope: He even moves his country's royalty to press for greater social concern and support for the disabled.
Possibly goaded out of sheer guilt, father Dickson finally surfaces and attends a celebration after Emmanuel's first triathlon. In the curious way that athletic fame flows in today's world, Emmanuel also is seen meeting both Robin Williams and Kofi Annan.
Camera (color/B&W, DV), Samson Chan; editors, April Wilson, Meredith Paige; music, Jeff Beal; sound, Alan Strusser. Reviewed at Santa Barbara Film Festival, Feb. 6, 2005. (Also in Cinequest, South by Southwest film festivals.) Running time: 80 MIN.
 

With:
 Emmanuel Ofosu Yeboah, Bob Babbitt, Jeffrey Essakow, Paul O'Keeffe, Gordon Adoboe, Jim MacLaren, Dr. Christopher Jube, Rudy Garcia Tolson, Dickson Ofosu.
 


In July 2002, Emmanuel Ofosu Yeboah biked 600 kilometers across Ghana —an achievement for anyone, but especially so for a man born with only one functional leg. Of course, cameras weren't rolling for the trip—which garnered Emmanuel a degree of international renown—so this hagiographic, after-the-fact documentary flounders for other angles. Emmanuel gets a prosthetic limb in the U.S. and competes in a triathlon. In interviews reminiscent of last summer's Murderball , people like Jim MacLaren  (described as "the Babe Ruth  of amputee athletes" and survivor of not one but two life-altering accidents) testify to his tenacity. Emmanuel then returns to Ghana, where he's greeted as a hero and reunited with his deadbeat father, and proceeds to campaign for the disabled, an astounding 10 percent of the country's population traditionally treated as second-class citizens. This feel-good profile barely touches on the political and cultural ramifications of Emmanuel's work. Narration by Oprah increases the aura of a civics lesson.
