

You know what ``Employee of the Month" needs? Chimps. Not just as cardboard decoration, the way Jessica Simpson functions in Dane Cook's big star vehicle. No, the movie needs chimps acting in it, producing it, directing it, writing the music, providing the catering, doing the marketing, and promoting it on Leno. Otherwise, it's a movie about adults whose lives revolve entirely around a New Mexico superstore. And no matter how many times a character gets whacked in the head, hit in the groin, or called lame, slutty, stupid, or gassy, the whole thing feels like a tragedy.
As entire towns turn Wal-Marts into meccas, maybe it's only right that the movies serve us up characters whose greatest bliss involves coming to work and competing for an ``employee of the month" accolade. Zack the superslacker (Cook) and weaselly Vince (Dax Shepard) are the contestants. The prize is a ``newish" Chevy Nova. But Simpson, a buxom but lifeless checkout girl, is who they're really competing for.
None of the other employees seems to want the honor -- not Vince's Mexican manservant (Efren ``Vote for Pedro" Ramirez); not Semi, the big dumb black security guard (Marcello Thedford); not the Middle Eastern guy (Brian George) with the large, rambunctious family. But everyone is happy to stand around and cheer on the two comedians whose names appear above the title. Ain't that America?
Perhaps ``Employee of the Month," which was typed then directed by Greg Coolidge, is unfolding in the key of satire. But you'd have to be a dog to hear it. This is a movie (yet another one) smitten with the adolescent adult. See a 34-year-old stand-up comedy star ride his Heelys down warehouse aisles and his mini-motorbike to the house he shares with grandma. See him play a round of rock-paper-scissors. See him scream, ``Jinx! You owe me a Coke!" when he and his famously divorced co star say a line of dialogue at the same time.
Little resembling Cook's popular stage material makes it into the film. In this bait and switch, he just tries to look adorable for the many close-ups. What animal magnetism he has in his concerts never arrives. Tim Bagley, as the flaming closet-case store manager, and Andy Dick give off a more intense sexual oomph.
To Cook's credit, though, this character is as pseudo-rebellious as his act. The comedian's enthusiasm for speeding through a bulk-item megastore in a race to please his corporate masters might endear him, anecdotally, to Hollywood producers and executives, but it's sad and never very funny. Chimps, though? Chimps would have been a riot.


         As it opens to the staccato electro-pop of Devo's cover of the R&B tune "Working in the Coal Mine," director Greg Coolidge's debut feature "Employee of the Month" shows the goings-on in a big-box retail store, here named Super Club. Shoppers reach for oversize tubs of hair gel or extra-large boxes of condoms as workers file into their places for another day of consumer paradise at a discount. It is the last time the film, with a screenplay credited to Coolidge, Don Calame and Chris Conroy, will engage meaningfully with its rather loaded setting, which only underlines the mindless, distracted vapidity of the main action.
 
  Zack (stand-up comic Dane Cook) has been an entry-level box boy for going on 10 years, while his co-worker Vince (Dax Shepard) has risen up the moderate ladder of promotions that will place him on a management track. Vince is in line to win "Employee of the Month" for the 18th straight time, when a pretty new cashier (singer and tabloid staple Jessica Simpson) transfers in from another store and is rumored to date only "E. of M." winners. After she offers passing encouragement to both men, Zack engages his longtime nemesis Vince in a battle for the month's title.
 


         






    Cook's stage persona is based on exaggeration and repetition, as his outsized gestures and elongated pronunciations make bullet points for where the punch lines come in. Stripped of his usual delivery, he struggles to convey regular-guy likability, coming across instead as alternately flat or arrogant.
 
  At one point Cook's character goes on to Simpson about how great it is to meet a beautiful girl who is also so cool. If only her part had some trace of character to convey that she were anything but blandly "the girl." From the moment of her entrance, a bouncy, slo-mo walk across the store, Simpson is asked to do nothing more than fulfill the film's prerequisite for boobs and teeth and shiny hair. In that respect she inhabits her role accordingly.
 
  The film never gets at the emotional drudgery or actual labor of working, or even particularly pauses to consider the essential smallness of the Employee of the Month contest, grown men competing literally for a daily gold star. This may be a just-for-fun comedy, but that shouldn't mean that it must entirely disconnect from the world.
 
 'Employeeof the Month'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for crude and sexual humor, and language
 
  A Lionsgate release. Director Greg Coolidge. Screenplay Don Calame, Chris Conroy, Greg Coolidge. Story Don Calame, Chris Conroy. Director of photography Anthony B. Richmond. Editors Kimberley Ray, Tom Lewis. Running time: 1 hour, 43 minutes.
 
  In general release.   

 A minimum-wage comedy with minimum-talent stars, “Employee of the Month” chronicles the rocky romance of two drones working for a Costco-like megastore. Zack (Dane Cook) is a slacker box boy who lives with his potty-mouthed grandmother (Barbara Dodd Ramsen) and plays Texas hold ’em instead of, well, boxing things. Amy (Jessica Simpson) is the bodacious new cashier whose virtue is reputedly available only to employee-of-the-month title holders. And they say there are no good roles for women these days.  Directed by Greg Coolidge with the flair of a training video, “Employee of the Month” turns work into a game and love into a sporting event. Competing against Zack for both the coveted title and Amy’s affections is the store’s odious head cashier, Vince (Dax Shepard), a k a “the fastest hands in the Southwest” (a moniker guaranteed to pique the interest of any young woman). As Zack and Amy bond over their physical idiosyncrasies — he has a tongue that could audition for Cirque du Soleil, she has ears like an African elephant — Vince and his faithful sidekick (Efren Ramirez) bicker like Gable and Lombard. Movies like this tend to believe a villain with repressed homosexual urges is much funnier than one without.  Replete with loser buddies, limp subplots and a dwarf named Glen Ross (Danny Woodburn), “Employee of the Month” is more tired than a Wal-Mart greeter at the end of a Saturday shift. One can only hope its halfhearted suggestion that winning isn’t everything is some comfort if the movie’s grosses are as disappointing as its jokes.  “Employee of the Month” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has bad words, bad acting and bad worker attitudes.

Corrections were made to this review on Oct. 2, 2006.
The slackers take on the brown-nosers in "Employee of the Month," a spoof of consumerism and competition that's slightly smarter than might be expected for a pic aimed at the Jessica Simpson demographic. Co-writer-director Greg Coolidge's hyphenate debut displays the influence of Mike Judge's "Office Space" on the '90s generation, including that pic's deadpan skewering of soulless corporate life. But "Employee" shifts the arena from the office to a Costco-like superstore. Falling short of being truly memorable but sharper than the general slagheap of comedies, pic will scan reasonably good biz at theatrical checkout stands. 

At a New Mexico-based branch of the Super Club membership store, longtime box boy Zack (standup comic Dane Cook) is inspired by hot new clerk Amy (Simpson) to compete for the title of "employee of the month," which Vince (Dax Shepard) has won 17 straight times.
Normally, languid Zack couldn't care less what Vince does, let alone what management thinks. But hearing that Amy sleeps with any guy who wins the monthly award -- and despising goody-good Vince -- spurs Zack to go mano-a-mano with the ace checkout clerk, known as "the fastest hands in the Southwest."
Baseball fans (who will be tickled by an amusing third-act sequence) might think of the Vince-Zack contest as the Yankees vs. a perennial basement-dweller like the Pirates, and so it's not surprising that Vince immediately racks up the daily gold stars.
Coolidge, cinematographer Anthony B. Richmond and particularly production designer Jon Gary Steele  appear to enjoy using the store's cavernous space and its huge web of aisles as an absurdly overgrown stage. Beyond its physically realistic depiction of shopping culture run amok, "Employee of the Month" is most enjoyable in its many asides. These include Vince habitually using bagboy and loyal sycophant Jorge (Efren Ramirez) as his key ally in the contest, and store boss Glen Gary (Tim Bagley) shuddering when he learns his brutish brother named -- in a cheeky nod to David Mamet -- Glen Ross (Danny Woodburn), is paying a visitfrom Super Club's corporate offices.
Pic's midsection, with the increasingly likable Zack threatening to overcome Vince's early lead, is unexpectedly funny and involving. Last section is much less so, mainly because Coolidge's script (co-written with Don Calame and Chris Conroy) appears duty-bound to obey every rule of conventional comedy plotting, down to the hero's seeming defeat and last-minute reprieve. This is where the movie seems to lose its bearings as a genuine post-"Office Space" American comedy and turns into just another formulaic laffer, albeit with a slightly more caustic edge than most.
Camaraderie in cast is a key to pic's enjoyment, delivered by the charismatic Cook, alongside his buddies, played by Brian George, Andy Dick (for once, not manic) and Harland Williams, with Bagley, Ramirez and Woodburn in hilarious standout turns. Shepard somewhat overplays his hand as the seemingly lordly Vince, while Simpson won't win new converts in a blah perf. Alas, Marcello Thedford as a slow-witted African American guard flirts with a role right out of the Stepin Fetchit era.
Even given that the production look is meant to depict a bland, plain-wrap world where products matter more than people, print screened was unusually blanched and lacking in sharpness. Product placement extends as far as the eye can see.
