 Few filmmakers make the end of days seem as hauntingly beautiful as  Werner Herzog does,  or as inexorable. In his documentary “Encounters at the End of the World,” this professional madman and restlessly curious filmmaker travels to the blinding white of the Antarctic, where he meets melancholic scientists, brooding journeymen and various poets of the soul who, ensconced in the American headquarters, McMurdo Station,   have traveled so far beyond the familiar coordinates — so far beyond traditional cities, suburbs and banal existence — that they might as well be on another planet.  Call it Planet Herzog. Though I’m certain that the men and the smattering of women in the documentary are far from ordinary — their fantastic milieu and haunted eyes suggest as much — part of what makes them memorable is how Mr. Herzog weaves them into his story. And make no mistake: from his familiar droning voice-over to his ethereally lovely images and stubborn fatalism, this is very much Werner Herzog’s story of the Antarctic and  not, as he intimates right up front, a heartfelt tale of “fluffy” penguins, an easy swipe at the palatable pleasures of the documentary “March of the Penguins.” Though there are, as it happens, some penguins here too, most memorably a Herzogean   creature that may trouble your dreams.  Like many of Mr. Herzog’s movies, fiction and nonfiction, “Encounters at the End of the World” itself has the quality of a dream: it’s at once vivid and vague, easy to grasp and somehow beyond reach. Its inspiration can be found in his 2005 movie, “The Wild Blue Yonder,” a self-described science fiction fantasy (about outer and inner spaces, for starters) that mixes fiction with nonfiction. Its most striking nonfiction moments come courtesy of the underwater video images shot in the Antarctic by his friend and sometime composer, the guitarist Henry Kaiser, of divers swimming in the eerie blue under a shelf of crystal ice. (Mr. Kaiser produced this new movie and, with David Lindley, did  its plaintive, effective string-centric music.)  These same underwater explorers return in “Encounters at the End of the World,” floating in cerulean amid otherworldly creatures, like fuzzy-looking clams that languidly snap open and close like fur castanets and an undulating jellyfish with silvery, near-transparent tentacles and what looks like a raw steak at its center. I could watch these surreal creatures for hours, and from the way he returns to these images, you get the sense that so could Mr. Herzog. But there are other sights and sounds to marvel at,  including  the Weddell seals that loll about indifferently on the surface, soaking up rays like fat, lazy tourists but, once underwater, create a symphony of electronic-like calls that one scientist accurately compares to Pink Floyd.  One of the beauties of “Encounters at the End of the World” is that all the furry and floating animals are no more wondrous than the bipeds tramping through and around McMurdo: the linguist turned philosopher, the banker turned bus driver and the female adventurer who, for drama and odd entertainment, likes to have herself zipped up in a carryall bag.  (She’s her own baggage.) Mr. Herzog opens his mind, heart and eyes to all these wayfarers who — despite the persistent strain of melancholy that touches each and every person who appears on camera — seem eerily at peace at the bottom of the world. One reason may be that, like Mr. Herzog, more than a few evince a deep-felt pessimism about both the present and the future.  If this were a nature documentary like any other, the casual talk about global warming and other calamities might cast shadows across this bright expanse. But there’s something about Mr. Herzog — including the accidental if now well-practiced comedy that colors even his most dramatic pronouncements — that inevitably keeps his pictures from growing too dark. One reason is beauty, which in his hands has a way of keeping the worst at bay; it is, after all, hard to fully despair in the face of so much of the natural world’s splendors. Another reason, I think, has to do with Mr. Herzog’s seemingly unshakable faith in human beings, who for all their misdeeds at times reach a state of exaltedness. They soar — just like that jellyfish.

Werner Herzog guarantees the viewer at the start of Antarctica docu "Encounters at the End of the World," he did not travel to the frozen continent to make "another film about penguins." Rather, the South Pole's human inhabitants piqued Herzog's interest -- the small but hearty community of researchers, scientists and assorted adventurers who make their home at the very bottom of the Earth. Resultant pic -- one of Herzog's best and most purely enjoyable -- may lack the built-in curio factor of "Grizzly Man" (which was produced, like "Encounters," by the Discovery Channel), but should nonetheless continue the iconoclastic helmer's niche box-office win streak, with long ancillary life to follow.
In many ways, Antarctica reps a logical a destination for Herzog, who has spent his career making films in some of the world's most remote corners and who, with "Encounters," becomes the first director to have shot a movie on each of the seven continents. On screen, though, Herzog is quick to criticize those who seek adventure strictly for personal glory or Guinness Book records, while reserving his highest praise for those restless souls who are not easily confined by the strictures of normal society and who find themselves forever venturing toward new horizons.
Upon arriving at Antarctica's McMurdo research station, Herzog finds such characters en masse, among them a former Colorado banker who now drives a great hulking vehicle christened Ivan the Terra Bus, a journeyman plumber who claims to be descended from Aztec royalty, and, in one of pic's most distinctly Herzogian moments, a female researcher who once traveled from London to Nairobi in the back of a garbage truck and who, during McMurdo's local talent night, contorts her body inside of a small piece of carry-on luggage.
Pic has a loose, episodic flow, punctuated (as usual in Herzog docus) by the director's own wry voiceover and his unerring eye for strangeness and eccentricity. So it is that Herzog is as struck by the forbidding vastness of Antarctica's "seemingly endless void" as he is by the often incongruous objects dotting the otherwise vacant landscape -- a yoga studio, an ATM machine, and a cafeteria where the soft-serve ice-cream machine named Frosty Boy is worshiped by the locals with a nearly religious fervor.
In one scene that wouldn't have looked out of place in one of Jacques Tati's famous farces, Herzog enlists in a survival camp where white-out blizzard conditions are simulated by having participants wear plastic buckets over their heads. Elsewhere, Herzog meets up with pic's producer/composer Henry Kaiser, an arctic diving enthusiast whose home-video footage of the icy Ross Sea sparked Herzog's interest in making "Encounters."
Kaiser serves as Herzog's conduit into Antarctica's elite scientific community, including cell biologist Sam Bowser, whose love of 1950s sci-fi disaster movies extends to screening a DVD of "Them!" for his bemused colleagues.
Then, after promising not to do it, Herzog engages with a contemplative penguin behaviorist, who grudgingly responds to the director's queries about "penguin prostitution." This leads to what is sure to be one of the pic's most discussed sequences, in which Herzog trains his camera upon a disoriented male penguin who has resolved, for reasons unknown, to trudge off toward Antarctica's sprawling interior and certain death. Leave it to Herzog to find the animal kingdom's equivalent of his many famed madmen protagonists.
Frequently there is the sense that, after decades of filming frontier societies, from the jungles of the Amazon ("Aguirre," "Fitzcarraldo") to the Australian outback ("Where the Green Ants Dream"), Herzog has arrived at a true final frontier, and that the only logical place left for him to take his camera next is outer space. As it is, there are many moments in which Herzog transforms the strange and wondrous sights and sounds of Antarctica into the landscape of an alien planet, as he did with the burning oil fields of Kuwait in his celebrated "Lessons of Darkness."
Lensed in crisp high-definition video by a two-man crew consisting of Herzog and d.p. Peter Zeitlinger, pic offers one arresting visual marvel after another and should render contrite all who say there is nothing left for movies to show us that we haven't seen before.
Camera (color, HD), Peter Zeitlinger; editor, Joe Bini; music, Henry Kaiser, David Lindley; sound, Herzog. Reviewed at Telluride Film Festival, Sept. 1, 2007. (Also in Toronto Film Festival -- Real to Reel.) Running time: 99 MIN.
 

