A good scandal can get your blood up; it has villains and victims, the cleansing fury of injustice made public. Yet there was little righteous or cathartic about the collapse of Enron. To follow the greedy machinations of Kenneth Lay and company was to enter the vortex of a new kind of virtual corruption, with its own universe of fine print. The scandal was a triumph of almost metaphysical obfuscation, which seemed to live on well after the company went bankrupt. The more you learned about Enron, the more it made your head hurt, until your anger shared space with impotence.
The cure for that malaise is Alex Gibney's Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room , a deeply straightforward yet beautifully crafted documentary (it's like a great Frontline  episode with hipper music) that turns the vortex inside out, and does it with a thrilling moral clarity. The film invites us to zero in, for instance, on the moment that Enron seems to take the leap from routine go-go bravado to a fearless new dimension of financial insanity: It's when Jeffrey Skilling, the company's CEO,  pushes ''mark-to-market'' accounting — thus booking potential future profits as if they'd already been realized. In a single stroke, Skilling, who resembles an angry Peter Jennings with a touch of a Charles Grodin weasel, appears to make it possible for Enron to declare its profit to be whatever the company wants it to be. The income statement therefore becomes a fiction, one that exists to keep the stock price high. The success of the stock acts as the proof of the company's glory, which then fuels the stock — a cycle of illusion destined to unravel.
Based on the book by Fortune magazine reporters Bethany McLean (who broke the story) and Peter Elkind, The Smartest Guys in the Room  lays bare, in funny and shocking video clips, the culture of arrogance at Enron, a corporation that exploited deregulation to turn the buying and selling of energy into a kind of private casino. It captures how the company was given favorable treatment by the Bush administration, and the bigger picture of how its fraudulence emerged from — and depended on — the speculative mania of the dotcom era. By the time Enron is shutting down electricity plants, exploiting — and perpetuating — the California energy crisis for its own ends (we hear a recording of one trader, during a brush fire, as he says ''Burn, baby, burn!''), you may be sitting there slack-jawed, wondering how they got away with it for so long. Or when it will happen again.

f you are looking for a good dose of outrage at a theater near you, you won't find a better bargain than "Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room," a new documentary directed by Alex Gibney. Documentaries have recently been making up for a shortfall in genuine movie heroes - those plucky child orthographers in "Spellbound" and the gritty wheelchair jocks of "Murderball" come to mind - and Mr. Gibney's film is the latest evidence that nonfiction cinema can supply worthy, hissable villains as well. Anyone who might be in the jury pool for the coming trials of Kenneth L. Lay and Jeffrey K. Skilling, the top Enron executives who have yet to face justice, should probably stay away, since the movie makes the case against them with prosecutorial vigor. Based on the best-selling book by the Fortune magazine reporters Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, "Enron" is a tight, fascinating chronicle of arrogance and greed. Interweaving Peter Coyote's sober, ever-so-slightly sarcastic voice-over narration with interviews and video clips (as well as one ill-advised and unnecessary re-enactment) and accompanied by an anthology of well-chosen pop songs, it manages to be both informative and entertaining. Much of the entertainment value comes from the undeniable pleasure of feeling morally superior to many of the people on screen, a nice antidote to the envy they might have inspired when they were riding high. Mr. Gibney uses video from Congressional hearings and financial chat-show appearances to damning effect; in the era before CSPAN and CNBC, the case against Enron might have been much harder to make. He has also obtained in-house video from company meetings, in which Mr. Skilling and Mr. Lay, in their very different styles, strut and brag through the company's boom years. Mr. Lay is a bit like a classic Texas football coach - gruff, tough but also possessing a measure of courtly charm. Mr. Skilling is more tightly wound, supremely confident of his intellect and abilities, with a chillier demeanor than his boss. When their enterprise starts to collapse, Mr. Skilling, expressing no remorse and accepting no responsibility, abruptly quits. Mr. Lay, rallying his troops, indulges in one of the most dismaying appropriations of the Sept. 11 attacks ever recorded, declaring to employees in the autumn of 2001 that, just like America, Enron is under attack. Among its tormentors were members of Congress from both parties, and also Mr. Elkind and Ms. McLean, who had the temerity, in the spring of 2001, to write a gently skeptical article called "Is Enron Overvalued?" What eventually became clear was that the company had been concocting value out of thin air, thanks not to the trading strategies it promoted as visionary but to financial games that turned a once-solid natural-gas distributor into the most notorious debacle in the era of corporate scandals. At times, the movie's explanation of Enron's business practices is hard to follow - and the practices themselves seem to have been deliberately made complex to the point of opacity - but the gist is clear enough. When boilerplate fails, many of the film's interview subjects resort to metaphor. The Titanic comes up more than once. Jonestown, the Lusitania and earthquakes are also mentioned. A Houston minister whose congregation includes many former Enron employees likens the company to "a house of cards built over a pool of gasoline." Appropriately enough, Mr. Gibney's quick, fluid editing gives his film the suspenseful, queasy fascination of a disaster flick, even - or perhaps especially - because you know exactly where it's headed. As the story moves forward, keep your eye on the bottom of the screen, where the stock price is periodically shown. Watch it soar, and then watch it plummet. Of course, the consequences of Enron's foray into funny money were quite serious, and "Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room" does not forget the real costs of this catastrophe. While it notes the friendship between Mr. Lay and the Bush family, and details Enron's role in the California energy crisis and the political destruction of Gray Davis, the film is for the most part too journalistically scrupulous to indulge in anything that might smack of conspiracy theorizing. Which is not to say that its scope is narrow or the implications of its story confined to one reckless Texas company. While the audience's contempt for Mr. Lay and Mr. Skilling feels good and is duly earned, Mr. Gibney does not encourage undue smugness. Without spelling too much out, "Enron" suggests a widespread moral deficit underlying Enron's eventual bankruptcy. Accountants held no one to account, governments abandoned their regulatory functions, the media turned cheaters into stars and a culture of self-righteous mendacity was allowed to flourish as long as the stock prices were high. The smart guys at Enron were clever - and amoral - enough to profit from those circumstances. In all likelihood, they regard themselves as scapegoats, even as the public views them as villains. It's not impossible that they are, to some extent, both.
At long last love: Kutcher and Peet take forever to connect
A Lot Like Love  exemplifies the happiness-deferred romance, in which two friends-but-should-be-paramours repeatedly convene, separate, and reconvene over several years, finally staying together only after feature run-time has elapsed. Skimming through lonely stretches and careerist angst, the movie focuses on incidents that threaten the final hookup. But the chemistry between diaper salesman Ashton Kutcher  and photo hound Amanda Peet  is so off that the pairing scans as an alienation effect—one enhanced by their age difference, as well as Peet's resemblance (in her goth, graduate-age New York scenes) to an unwaxed Demi Moore . The banter soon develops a rhythm: Hurting from a breakup, Peet gets too drunk to nuzzle and Kutcher doesn't complain; years later, on a car trip, Kutcher whines about his ex and Peet shrugs it off. Interjections from perennial second bananas Kathryn Hahn  (How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days ) and Kal Penn  (winning even when not conjuring vivified bags of pot) generate the only sparks.
