 Lush, lurid and completely besotted with itself, "Eternal" is one of those movies normally found slinking around the ether of late-night cable television. A heady combination of kink and bloodletting, the film claims inspiration from the undeniably intriguing life of Erzsebet Bathory, a 16th-century Hungarian countess whose anti-aging routine required frequent immersions in young, female blood, a set-up that should guarantee at least a little visual excitement. But "Eternal" is quite possibly the dullest, least sexy lesbian vampire movie I have ever seen.  In a ghostly mansion in present-day Montreal, Elizabeth Kane (Caroline Néron) and her comely assistant, Irina (Victoria Sanchez), seduce unwary young women who have yet to learn the perils of Internet dating. Distracting her prey with aggressive cleavage and husky European vowels, Elizabeth slices their compliant throats with a cunning little claw-tipped thimble. "Thank you for your beauty," she whispers politely before each exsanguination. A lady never forgets her manners.  Unfortunately, her latest victim was married to Raymond Pope (Conrad Pla), an oafish cop with a taste for bondage and his partner's wife - usually at the same time. As Ray, assisted by Interpol, sets out to prove Elizabeth's guilt by drooling at her relentlessly, Irina tries to allay her mistress's fears. "They're just human, they can't do nothing to you!" she insists, proving that fresh blood may boost a girl's beauty but it doesn't seem to be much help with grammar.  "Eternal" is the debut feature of Wilhelm Liebenberg and Federico Sanchez, who have aimed for Dario Argento and ended up with Bob Guccione. Opulent but empty, the film's softly pornographic visuals frame thoroughly unlikable characters and complete narrative idiocy. While the director of photography, Jamie Thompson, whips back and forth between high heels and low necklines, the actors struggle against their limitations to bring some heat to the proceedings But not even the killer combo of chains and a leather bikini can break through the film's patina of cold artiness.  Straining desperately to be "Interview With the Vampire," "Eternal" succeeds only in being the kind of movie that pauses any time a young hottie feels like dancing in her underwear. By the time we get to a costume ball in Venice, complete with masks remaindered from "Eyes Wide Shut" and a hot tub filled with blood, most of us are more likely to be asleep than aroused. Yet, despite all evidence to the contrary, there is an audience for this film. You know who you are.

Approximating "Interview With the Vampire"-type opulence on something closer to a "Red Shoes Diaries" budget, erotic thriller "Eternal" is the first feature for directors-writers-producers Wilhelm Liebenberg and Federico Sanchez. Their shared design and advertising backgrounds show in a handsome package whose atmospherics outclass merely serviceable plot and character elements. Ever-popular "lesbian vampire chic" angle (though the primary dynamic here is between the lead vamp and a macho male cop) will lure the genre faithful. Some theatrical sales are likely (Regent plans a fall U.S. release), but primary exposure will be in rental and cable markets. 
An impressive gated mansion on Montreal's outskirts is home to the mysterious Elizabeth Kane (Caroline Neron), whose many attractive female guests never leave the premises. When latest to disappear is the bi-curious wife of philandering police detective Ray Pope (former pro kickboxer Conrad Pla), latter's own penchant for kink and Liz's deadly sense of sportsmanship commence a cat-and-mouse game littered with corpses and heavy-breathing sex.
Eventually pursuing her to Venice, Ray discovers she's really Erszebet Bathory, a 16th-century Hungarian aristocrat who bathed in the blood of some 650 virgins to maintain a youthful appearance. Their climactic standoff takes place amid an orgiastic masked ball where she's preparing not just a literal blood-bath, but a virtual blood-jacuzzi.
Pic maintains a straight face through increasingly silly events. Credibility, even by horror-fantasy standards, is stretched to the breaking point as Ray continues to roam free even after Elizabeth firmly frames him for several murders she or wannabe-vampire assistant Irina (Victoria Sanchez) committed themselves. It doesn't help that the protag seems little affected by the deaths of those closest to him -- character conception and Pla's loutish perf run a short emotional gamut from smirk to snarl.
Pic seems uncertain whether to emphasize Elizabeth's disinterest/contempt toward men, or suggest she considers Ray a worthy adversary-cum-partner. Since the latter rings false, an ambiguous epilogue hinting at their possible future together doesn't quite work.
But the main agenda here is to titillate and induce a chill or two, not advance psychological realism. Excellent use of locations, ornate set dressing, sexy costumes, et al. hit the right decadent-sinister note. Real scares are few, in part because the major characters are unsympathetic. It's notable that the one genuinely suspenseful scene involves imminent harm to a too-briefly-seen support figure (Liane Balaban as Ray's flirty neighbor-babysitter Lisa) who's by far the most likeable presence here.
Camera (color), Jamie Thompson; editors, Isabelle Levesque, Denis Papillon; music, Mysterious Art; production designer, Perri Gorrara; art directors, Massimo Antonello Geleng, Marina Pinzuti; set decorator, Susan C. MacQuarrie; costume designers, Claire Nadon, Stefania Sziveretto; sound (Dolby Digital), Louis Dupire; assistant director, Don Terry; second unit director, Marzio Casa; casting, Aldo Tirelli. Reviewed at San Francisco Lesbian & Gay Film Festival, June 19, 2005. Running time: 108 MIN.
 


"It is a study of the psychopathologies of perversions," co-director Federico Sanchez  says in the press notes for Eternal , which is certainly one way to rationalize a trashy lesbian vampire flick. Tame and cheesy even by the modest standards of the genre, Eternal  needs all the intellectual trappings it can find. The opening credits assure us that the story is "inspired by true events," which in this case means that one of the main characters is Erszebet Bathory, a 16th-century Hungarian countess apparently famous for slaughtering young maids. Eternal  finds her—now Elizabeth (Caroline Néron)—at home in modern Montreal , extolling her supernatural Rottweiler and luring closeted women to her gated mansion, where nudity-deficient intercourse serves as a prelude to bloodletting. Unfortunately, she offs the wife of a sleazebag detective (Daniel Day-Lewis  look-alike Conrad Pla ), who nevertheless finds himself drawn to his suspect's Basic Instinct  allure. This is the kind of movie where a character jokes that she'll "probably be dead when you get back" and we're supposed to be startled when the premonition proves accurate. Despite pretensions of significance (a masked orgy is shamelessly pilfered from Eyes Wide Shut ), Eternal  won't even last on late-night cable.
