A Chorus Line , as everyone knows, is the sublime Broadway musical (first staged in 1975) in which a bunch of eager, nervous,  I'll-die-if-I-don't-get-it dancers audition for a Broadway musical. So what does that make Every Little Step ? It's a documentary, pegged to the 2006 revival of A Chorus Line , that asks you to share the joy, vulnerability, heartbreak, and love of a bunch of dancers trying out for a musical about a bunch of dancers trying out for a musical. It is, in other words, a movie as layered and enthralling as its subject.
The filmmakers, James D. Stern and Adam Del Deo, keep cutting to an audiotape of the interview that director-choreographer Michael Bennett held at midnight on Jan. 26, 1974, when he gathered a handful of dancers to tell their stories and confess their dreams. Every Little Step  salutes Bennett's creation of the first reality musical by turning the run-up to the 2006 revival into a fierce backstage reality pageant of its own. It's fascinating to compare the performers who almost have that ineffable ''it'' to those who land the roles because they inhabit them. And the film offers a tantalizing glimpse into Bennett, who celebrated dancers but also used them to de-exoticize what it means to be gay. It's partly because of A Chorus Line  that we now live in a different world.
See all current movie reviews from EW

 Watching “Every Little Step,” a new documentary by James D. Stern and Adam Del Deo, is a bit like walking through a hall of mirrors. Life imitates art, art reflects life, and after a while the distinctions threaten, quite pleasantly, to blur altogether. The film follows a group of mostly young dancers and singers auditioning for parts in the recent Broadway revival of “A Chorus Line,” a musical which is itself built around the auditions of 17 mostly young Broadway-besotted dancers and singers.  The premise of “Every Little Step” is no less inspired for seeming so simple and obvious, and it pays tribute to the durability and continued relevance of “A Chorus Line,” which first opened in New York in 1975, before many of the performers in the movie were born.  The theater director Michael Bennett had an equally inspired, equally simple idea when he tape-recorded the confessions, dreams and fears of gypsy hoofers and chirpers and turned their reflections on show business life into the basis of a show that ran for 15 years and collected just about every prize there is. (It also collected hard feelings from some of the people whose voices and lives Mr. Bennett used, but that’s another story.)  “A Chorus Line,” with brilliant music by Marvin Hamlisch and lyrics by Edward Kleban, and a canny book by James Kirkwood and Nicholas Dante, gives voice to deep, widely shared anxieties and aspirations, but its big themes are grounded in the lives, voices and bodies of individuals. And so the thousands of auditioners who show up, at the start of “Every Little Step,” for the first casting call — and who over the following months are winnowed down to scores, then dozens and finally a few singular sensations — are hardly faceless or interchangeable.  Still, there is only time to become acquainted with a few of them, and the filmmakers, concentrating on the moment-to-moment drama of the casting process rather than on back stories or personalities, introduce us to the performers by way of the characters they are hoping to play. We learn some names and a bit of biography — one woman is the daughter of a retired ballet dancer; another arrives by bus from New Jersey — but most of what we glean about the potential cast members comes from their closeness to the archetypes represented by Kristine, Mike, Cassie and the others Mr. Bennett and his collaborators delivered from anonymity.  Cassie — a role originated by Donna McKechnie, who is interviewed in “Every Little Step” — is a step away from has-been status and desperate to keep working. Others sing and speak about their childhood love of dancing and one, Paul, delivers a heart-wrenching soliloquy about coming out as a gay man and an artist. The casting of this part is one of the most touching and least suspenseful moments in the film, thanks to Jason Tam’s tour de force audition. As a general rule, if you reduce an entire casting committee to tears, you’ll probably get the part.  Not that every decision is so easy. Among those casting the new production are Bob Avian, who choreographed the earlier show along with Mr. Bennett, and Baayork Lee, a fellow choreographer who originated the role of Connie, a tiny dancer with big desires. They and their colleagues survey the contenders with a mixture of compassion and rigor that quietly underscores the wised-up romanticism of “A Chorus Line.”  The musical, whose rich history is recalled between auditions for the revival, has become such a touchstone because it perfectly captures both the cruelty and the marvelousness of life in the theater. Mr. Bennett, who died in 1987, appears in archival clips looking like a slightly jaded elf, combining a weary knowingness with an ardent and undiminished capacity for wonder.  There is a superficial resemblance between “Every Little Step” (and, for that matter, “A Chorus Line” itself) and television reality shows in which ordinary people use their talents to scramble for the spotlight. But those programs are spectacles of amateurism chasing after celebrity, an impulse that could not be further from what Mr. Stern and Mr. Del Deo, taking their cues from Mr. Bennett, set out to honor. The 17 members of that chorus line — and the thousands like them, including those who dream of playing them — are professionals, and one of the names they give to the glory they seek is work. The other is love.

In 1974, 18 years before MTV  first assembled a group of comically mismatched twentysomethings and videotaped them being real, the choreographer Michael Bennett  gathered 22 Broadway dancers late one night, set a tape recorder running, and asked them to talk about their lives. They did, telling moving tales of their career struggles, troubled childhoods, and sexual awakenings. Those stories, shaped by Bennett and his collaborators, became A Chorus Line , which opened at the Public Theater the next year, soon transferred to Broadway, and ran there for a then-unprecedented 15 years. James D. Stern  and Adam Del Deo's documentary Every Little Step  juxtaposes the casting process for the 2006 revival with the affecting story of A Chorus Line 's creation. Following several performers as they audition for the revival, the doc's approach is designed, one presumes, to attract a wider audience in the era of reality entertainment. But while that meshes nicely with the arc of the musical itself—about dancers going through a grueling interview process to earn a spot on the line—we never learn enough about the individual subjects to care about their stories. For Chorus Line  fans, though, the documentary—executive produced, it's worth noting, by theatrical superlawyer John Breglio , who also produced the revival and controls Bennett's estate—is a singular sensation, filled with behind-the-scenes backstory and archival clips of Bennett himself dancing, gorgeously. Then there are those original interview tapes, kept under lock and key for 35 years, with the dancers speaking the words that, up until now, you've only known as lyrics.
