We've rarely seen Vancouver as we see it in Everything's Gone Green : as Vancouver. On a break from playing Seattle or Manhattan, the city gets to flaunt its emerald foliage, which is enough to give an unusual shine to this agreeable twentysomething-angst comedy scripted by novelist Douglas Coupland. The story — a guy (Paulo Costanzo) who works for the lottery gets mixed up in money laundering — is slight, but an appealing cast and lots of scenic leafery make Green  feel fresh.


Vancouver plays itself for once in "Generation X" author Douglas Coupland's first original screenwriting venture, "Everything's Gone Green." Starring an excellent Paulo Costanzo (late of "Joey") as a twentysomething uberslacker who is nonetheless willing to fall into accidental success, pic is seasoned with fine perfs by JR Bourne as a charismatic, creepy hustler and Steph Song as Constanzo's sexy potential love interest. Playful combo of geo-particulars and amusing universals could help "Green" go far. 
 Costanzo's Ryan loses his job and is dumped the same day by his g.f. (Katharine Isabelle), who delivers a classic college-age kiss-off: "I'm sick of you and your Billy bookshelves." Being a man more of Ikeas than ideas, he lucks into a new job, writing blurbs about lottery winners in a tacky government mag. 
Device is a brilliant way to parachute Ryan into lifestyles of the suddenly rich and not-otherwise-likely-to-be-famous. It also brings him into contact with Bryce (Bourne), a scammer who comes up with a money-laundering scheme involving the new winners. Soon, and without a lot of thought, Ryan has got the sports car and leather jacket of moneyed youth -- something that puts him at odds with Ming (the versatile Song), a beautiful set-dresser who just so happens to be in the process of getting rid of b.f. Bryce; the last thing she needs is Bryce Lite. 
Helmer Paul Fox, a non-Northwesterner, has handily captured the Pacific Rim ambiguities of a town still immature about its own best attributes. "Everything" starts coming into sharper focus as it seemingly shambles along, making smart points about the limits of greed (and green) in a world of diminishing resources and expanding competition. Costanzo and Song have a nice, easygoing chemistry, oddly helped along by Chiu-Lin Tam as the girl's spunky, non-English speaking granny.
Soundtrack is appropriately heavy on jangly B.C. bands like the Fembots and Sloan.
Camera (color) David Frazee; editor, Gareth C. Scales; music, Sloan, Fembots, others; music supervisor, David Hayman; production designer, Peter Andringa; art director, Carolyn Neuert; set designer, Matthew Versteeg; costume designer, Sheila White; sound (Dolby SRD), Eric Batut; line producer, Ken Lawson; assistant director, Patricia Ann Dyer; casting, Corinne Clark, Robin Cook, Jennifer Page. Reviewed at Vancouver Film Festival (Canadian Images -- competing), Sept. 15, 2006. Running time: 95 MIN. 

 


With, say, a Fox Searchlight  behind it, director Paul Fox 's charming adaptation of Doug "Generation X" Coupland's sole screenplay might have been a contender, but as it stands, this winsome tale of a Vancouver  slacker stumbling into success, love, and something approaching maturity will likely slip away. It shouldn't, least of all because Paulo Costanzo  emerges as a most amiable leading man. Costanzo's Ryan is the Coupland archetype: aware but not engaged, older but not grown-up, thoughtful but not quite there . He loses his girl and his gig, only to wind up writing about lottery winners for a supermarket magazine until he meets another girl (Steph Song ) and her con-artist boyfriend (J.R. Bourne ), with whom Ryan ends up in business. He's forced to choose between the two, but it's not the big picture that charms here, it's the details. More than anything, though, it's Costanzo—a spindly Everydork who grows up not because he has to, but because he just kinda wants to.
