 How atrocious is the comedy “Everybody Wants to Be Italian”? Let me count the ways. There’s the punishingly jaunty ethnic soundtrack (“Funiculì, Funiculà,” la la la) and the regressive gender stereotypes. Then there’s the heroine whose lofty dating standards demand a partner who’s “a step up” from her vibrator, and the hero who — cognitively, at least — rates several rungs lower. And if you’re still not persuaded to just rent “Moonstruck” and be done with it, ponder this: assuming the title was ever correct, it won’t be by the time you exit the theater.  The painfully humorless plot concerns a Boston fishmonger named Jake (Jay Jablonski) who, eight years after being dumped, is still creepily stalking his now married ex. Jake is clearly several cheeses short of the sample platter, but that’s not a problem for Marisa (Cerina Vincent), a gorgeous veterinarian who pursues a relationship despite Jake’s distinct lack of either a personality or a clue. Egged on by a trio of Jake’s co-workers — who, armed with night classes in literature and psychology, offer unoriginal postdate analyses — the couple stumble toward contrived-comedy bliss.  Written and directed by Jason Todd Ipson, “Everybody Wants to Be Italian” features annoying characters navigating unbelievable situations. “I literally dreamt the entire script,” Mr. Ipson says in the press notes. Now that I can believe.  “Everybody Wants to Be Italian” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Ethnic vulgarity, including the expected abuse of the word “bracciole.

A box of cannoli long past its sell-by date, "Everybody Wants to Be Italian" is a clumsy but inoffensive romantic comedy set in and around Boston's Little Italy. To his credit, writer-director Jason Todd Ipson mostly avoids the shrill stereotyping of "My Big Fat Greek Wedding," instead applying a vague, almost half-hearted Italian overlay to a typically quirky tale of two mopey souls who are both attractive and (go figure) unlucky in love. Slight Roadside Attractions release begins its limited run Sept. 5.
Plucky young fishmonger Jake (Jay Jablonski) gets fixed up on a blind date with beautiful thirtysomething veterinarian Marisa (Cerina Vincent); neither is Italian, though each thinks the other is. Pic mostly ignores this mistaken-ethnicity hook, instead focusing on Jake's stalkerish determination to win back his ex (Marisa Petroro), never mind that she's married with kids now. Jablonski and Vincent have appealing moments but are often elbowed aside by John Kapelos and John Enos III as Jake's boisterously shticky buddies. Relentless accordion music adds grating ambience, and the inevitable Italy-set coda looks none too authentic. Dead fish in Jake's market are by far the pic's freshest elements.
Camera (color), Michael Fimognari; editor, Mike Saenz; music, Michael Cohen; music supervisor, Jennifer Reeve; production designer, Marla Altschuler; art director, Lucy Spas; set decorator, Moe Moe Lwin; costume designer, Nicole Capasso. Reviewed on DVD, Glendale, Calif., Sept. 3, 2008. (In 2007 Boston Film Festival.) Running time: 105 MIN.
 



Less a movie than a charm offensive beamed at those who thought My Big Fat Greek Wedding  was a masterpiece, writer-director Jason Todd Ipson 's all-too-autobiographical romantic comedy stars Jay Jablonski  as Jake, an addled Boston fishmonger with little to distinguish him beyond a fine set of washboard abs and a thing for stacked but unavailable Mediterranean women. Which means the only difference between Jake's married former squeeze (Marisa Petroro ) and the luscious veterinarian (Cerina Vincent ) reeled in for his benefit by his unusually literary employees is that the latter is threateningly unattached. Filling in for plot and theme (beyond "Will this unreconstructed man-child give up his childish pursuits and commit?") is a lot of loose talk about Freud and Shakespeare , some nice shots of Boston's Storrow Drive, jolly accordions on the soundtrack, a chorus of swearing North End Italians with warm hearts and funny accents, and a mercifully brief appearance by Penny Marshall . All that remains is to ask what this soggy excuse for a movie is doing on Roadside Attractions ' slate, while scores of promising independent filmmakers pray for distribution—or at least an overtaxed arthouse in which to show off the fruits of their far superior labor.
