In Explicit Ills  the actor-turned-director Mark Webber juggles four vignettes of addiction and damage in lower-depths Philadelphia. Two of the cast members shine: Lou Taylor Pucci as a drug dealer who finds a new lover and baptizes himself in substance abuse, and Rosario Dawson as a mother trying to care for her asthmatic son with no health insurance. Webber has a knack for bringing out actors at their showiest, but he palms off too much first-draft sketchiness as ''ambiguity.'' Who is Pucci's character apart from his drug habit? We have no clue. B–
See all current movie reviews from EW

 For much of its 87 minutes, “Explicit Ills,” an episodic movie about a number of Philadelphians living, working and often struggling in the same neighborhood, appears to move from life to life without particular reason. Its first-time writer and director, Mark Webber, doesn’t immediately reveal the story’s structure or his intentions: he simply places you among some dozen characters — children and young adults of different colors and with differing economic contexts — without introduction. A young boy buys a soda in one scene, an older boy explains the benefits of a vegan diet in another; one man sells pot while another sells colonics.  These are a few  of the souls  finding and losing themselves in a neighborhood in uneasy transition alongside a bohemian wife (Naomie Harris) who steals puffs off blunts in between yoga poses and a poor mother (Rosario Dawson) trying to care for her asthmatic son. In time, themes (financial distress, self-medication, existential isolation) emerge from their lives, and seemingly casual moments begin to take larger shape, much as the dots in a pointillist painting do as you step back from the canvas. Though some  of his visual choices can seem arbitrary (the  long shots tend to feel more like art-cinema tics than formally organic), Mr. Webber, working with the talented cinematographer Patrice Lucien Cochet, persuasively transforms a group of portraits into a group portrait.  As the story’s design and Mr. Webber’s intentions come into focus, it becomes evident that this is yet another of those multistranded narratives that have come into vogue again. In some  recent films of this type, most of which come with a veneer of politics and invariably embrace humanism, the characters are connected by a gun (“Babel”), ethnic and racial tensions (“Crash”) and immigration (“Crossing Over”). Yet what binds them isn’t just that they’re all hurting human beings joined by their common pain, but that the filmmaker also wants you to know that they’re all hurting human beings and he feels their pain. Mr. Webber at least offers a solution, as  evidenced by a man who spray-paints the word “revolt” in letters so large they fill the entire frame.  Even so, no matter how ostensibly profound their differences, the characters in all these movies end up hoisting the exact same banner for the filmmaker. In the case of “Explicit Ills,” this banner-carrying becomes literalized when the  characters  take to the streets in the final scene during an organized demonstration, a neighborhood of atomized individuals transformed into a coalition of the righteous and united on behalf of medical care, housing and peace. It’s a beautiful message: surely there’s no arguing with “Hey, hey, ho, ho, poverty has got to go!” But there is much to argue with, and much to regret, about a film whose director thinks he needs to drop an anvil on our heads when art would suffice.  “Explicit Ills” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Physical violence, recreational drug use and some health-care horror.

A tender ensemble slice of inner-city Philly life to wash out the foul taste of Crossing Over 's far more explicit ills, The Hottest State  star Mark Webber 's directorial debut is also, not surprisingly, stronger than either of Ethan Hawke 's stints behind the camera. Having spent time squatting while being raised by a single mom, Webber has been an outspoken activist against urban poverty, thus his all-star indie cast tends to serve as a collective mouthpiece for his lefty politics. The lived-in performances include Lou Taylor Pucci  as the artist who has to sell pot to survive, Paul Dano  as a struggling actor battling the melancholia of an unhelpful world, Rosario Dawson  as the working-class mother of a young asthmatic (newcomer Francisco Burgos , a tad too precocious for his own good), and Tariq "Black Thought" Trotter  as Jimmy Fallon 's new house-band MC and also a vegan entrepreneur. Executive produced by Jim Jarmusch  and lensed with luminous saturation by Patrice Lucien Cochet , the film is confidently polished and thankfully more sweet-tempered than preachy, given that every narrative thread has an underlying theme of social injustice. As it leads up to a neighborhood-wide rally that brings every character together, it's a shame that Webber (in a marching cameo) has already surrendered his drama over to a last-act tragedy (poverty's fault, of course). For that, I, too, protest.
