 The career of Alberto K. Fujimori, who was president of Peru from 1990 to 2000, surely holds a special place in the annals of Latin American dictatorship. That region has had no shortage of strongmen, whose allegiances to left- or right-wing ideologies may be less significant than their adherence to the long and diverse tradition of caudillismo, or boss rule. Mr. Fujimori's tale, the subject of Ellen Perry's excellent documentary, in some ways fits a familiar, unhappy pattern, as good intentions and impressive early accomplishments give way to corruption and authoritarianism.  But some of the details would beggar even the feverish imagination of a novelist of magical realism, and "The Fall of Fujimori" offers, among other things, the latest proof that nonfiction filmmaking can be stranger than any make-believe. The film, which makes use of archival clips and interviews with Peruvian journalists and political figures, is built around an extraordinary series of conversations with Mr. Fujimori himself. Interviewed in Japan, where he was both  a fugitive from international justice and considering ways to return to his old job, he appears both steely and soft-spoken, obligingly candid one moment and defensive the next. (Last fall, he was arrested in Chile at the request of the Peruvian authorities, who are seeking his extradition.) The son of Japanese immigrants and an engineer by training, Mr. Fujimori emerged suddenly from obscurity in the 1990 Peruvian presidential elections. His campaign slogan -  "A president like you"  - may have seemed counterintuitive given his ethnic and professional background, but many ordinary Peruvians, their patience strained by drug trafficking, political violence and economic stagnation, believed he could bring peace and prosperity.  At first, he seemed to make good on their hopes. Throughout the 1980's, Peru had been menaced by two guerrilla armies. The more violent was the Shining Path, a fanatical Maoist sect led by a former philosophy professor named Abimael Guzman Reynoso, whose model of revolution owed more to  Pol Pot than to Che Guevara. Mr. Fujimori and his security chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, crushed the Shining Path and captured Mr. Guzman, but they also rode roughshod over Peru's democratic institutions and legal procedures. Death squads remained active, prison conditions were appalling and citizens suspected of terrorism were tried in secret before panels of hooded military judges.  In 1992, frustrated by the independence of the legislature, Mr. Fujimori engineered what Peruvians call an autogolpe, or self-coup, which led to a new constitution drastically increasing his power. In his second presidential campaign, in 1995, Fujimori, who had tamed Peru's inflation as well as its guerrillas, was re-elected in a landslide. Then came a four-month hostage crisis at the Japanese Embassy, followed by revelations that Mr. Montesinos had been bribing almost anyone who came into his office, and before his third term began, Mr. Fujimori was faxing in his resignation from Japan.  Ms. Perry relates this chronicle with brisk efficiency, lingering over particularly curious episodes -  like the presidential candidacy of Mr. Fujimori's wife in 1995, after which she was replaced as first lady by their daughter, a college sophomore -  and filling in gaps with clear narration. If anything, "The Fall of Fujimori" might have benefited from a bit more attention to background. It works less as a comprehensive history than as the visual equivalent of a magazine profile, using a fascinating and somewhat mysterious individual as a lens through which complicated events can be examined.  Mr. Fujimori seems mild-mannered and unpretentious, though Ms. Perry does manage to bring out the evasive and paranoid aspects of his temperament. She also, with great subtlety, allows some implications of his career to ripple beyond Peru in the 1990's, turning "The Fall of Fujimori" into a cautionary essay on the risks to democracy posed by the fight against terrorism.
The Fall of Fujimori  is more—or less—than the flip side to last week's Film Forum Peru  primer State of Fear : It's a prismatic shudder, a maddening manifestation of historical ambivalence. Many serious docs could cover the last 25 years of Peruvian history and each come up with an individuated perspective. The reason for this hall-of-mirrors record-keeping is obvious: Thanks to the Shining Path  terrorists and the violent response they elicited from three presidencies, everybody's wrong means anybody's right. The only sane people in the entire nation then were the silent majority—the victims of the "low-intensity" warfare as well as the economic rape that created it.
State of Fear , though concerned with Peru's criminal levels of poverty, only glancingly explores its foundations; Ellen Perry 's film evades the matter. The IMF  isn't mentioned once, although its intervention is what allowed Alberto Fujimori  to plundercratize the country in his efforts toward "security." The narrator mentions a mid-Fujimori-tenure "economic boom," but, tellingly, enforced privatization and the resulting acceleration of poverty instead incited the population to protest dictatorship by the tens of thousands.
The Fall of Fujimori is more concerned with the personal experience of amoral power. With the man's cooperation, Perry trails after Fujimori during his exile in Japan  (he's since been arrested in Chile ) and interviews him about his reign from his gently, modestly expressed point of view. It's an astonishing story we heard precious little of in American media, including (in addition to the assassinations, disappearances, and arbitrary imprisonments) the revolt of Fujimori's own wife, who accused him of the minor scandal that precipitated Fujimori's 1992 "self-coup." She also ran against him, while they were co-habitating, in 1995. The absurd dramatics continued into 2000, when right-hand man Vladimiro Montesinos 's videotapes of briberies were broadcast and Fujimori embarked on a completely televised "chase" to find his henchman, who'd jumped ship in the night.
Perry may seem a little Stockholm  syndromed after riding in Fujimori's limo, attributing 35,000 murders to his adversaries Shining Path, as compared to State of Fear 's rough 10K. (Nobody knows exactly who is responsible for what number of corpses, but the 2003 Truth Commission attributes 12K to Shining Path.) Her film remains an intriguing portrait, even if its accep- tance of Fujimori's shrugging demeanor and blame- storming serve to detour our concern from its proper place: the Indians who were routed, were shot, and disappeared by both sides of the struggle and by Fujimori's covert forces after Peru's terrorist threat had evaporated. In the end, the movie is a commitment to the politics of personality, not of people.
