
''Fascination," a nominal erotic thriller whose story I still can't decipher, does raise a few important questions. For instance, when two suspected spouse killers get married, who dies first? And can things bode well for the new family when his daughter and her son slip out of the wedding ceremony to make love on a slanted roof in a sudden rainstorm?
I'm afraid this is one of those
 movies, one where ''plot" is another word for ''gratuitous sex scene." Here, the young lovers are Scott (Adam Garcia) and Kelly (Alice Evans), brand new stepsiblings who do indeed go about their consummation on the day of Mom and Dad's nuptials. He's miffed that his mother, Maureen (Jacqueline Bisset), has agreed to marry Oliver (Stuart Wilson) so soon after his father's mysterious death -- and while on vacation! (''What is it about cruise ships?" Kelly wonders.)
Oliver, meanwhile, is a widower himself. His wife died mysteriously, too. And eventually, we find out -- well, I
 found out (you, reader, should stay away and just take my word for it) -- that the deaths bear some relation to each other. Figuring this out, though, requires the two kids to sit around Maureen's Puerto Rican Shangri La and have numerous expository conversations. Kelly, it seems, is already trying to plant seeds of suspicion in her new lover's head. Scott's dad was a silver-medalist swimmer in the 1964 Olympics, ''but he died in a swimming accident. It's weird," she says. Then she tells a story of how her father might have been mixed up in her mother's death. What is Kelly up to?
Scott confronts his mother with his doubts about her new husband. She's taken aback: ''For someone as young and for someone as artistically inclined as you are, you've become quite judgmental." Who can say what one thing has to do with the other, but what more can you expect from a movie whose production notes make no immediate mention of a screenwriter?
Some digging around does reveal that the German-born, first-time director Klaus Menzel got ahold of Daryl Haney and John Jacobs's ancient script (it's from 1989). ''Now came the hard part: making it my own," the notes quote him as saying. So perhaps we have only him to thank for a line like ''Let me kiss you through the pain," which Kelly whispers to Scott before their sopping wet, rooftop tryst gets underway. (Thank you, Klaus. Thank you so much.)
It's believable that the screenplay was originally a parody, but it was written at a time when erotic thrillers had a certain sleazy seriousness. Say it with me: ''Wild Orchid." (Incidentally, that movie also starred Bisset, as a woman filled with lust and danger whenever Mickey Rourke was around.) Fifteen years later, it's possible that Menzel's flaccid movie just feels
 parodic, because no one says ''I want you to dig up my father's grave" anymore and means it.
Garcia, who was Piper Perabo's charismatic boy toy in ''Coyote Ugly," once seemed bound for minor stardom. So much for that. Here he seems to be strangling his native Australian accent in order to speak in a flat American-ish voice. Evans is worse. Whenever she delivers a line, her face twitches and contorts as though she were having an allergic reaction to her dialogue. There's better acting in the display windows of some department stores.
Garcia and Evans have the sort of chemistry that could be used at middle schools across the country to encourage abstinence. The couple enjoys one long, unsexy dance at a nightclub on the beach that will make you never want to go near that stepsibling hookup fantasy again.


The only magnetism generated by ersatz black-widow "Fascination" is that perilous urge to slow down and peek at the roadside wreck. Glacially paced, self-consciously acted and narratively risible, this so-called thriller about a pair of step-siblings who fall in lust even as they work to uncover the murders that apparently led to their familial link comes to January's googolplex graveyard after a less-than-stellar Teutonic bow last October, but will give the Lion little to roar about either theatrically or upon ancillary interment.
Following the mysterious, watery death of his fit, rich father Patrick (James Naughton), struggling twentysomething musician Scott Doherty (Adam Garcia) returns to the family compound in Florida to comfort his mother Maureen (Jacqueline Bisset, who flips her hair back a lot).
Mom scarcely needs the support, announcing her intention, after an off-screen cruise, to marry Euro-trashy Brit businessman Oliver Vance (Stuart Wilson). Thus does Scott inherit step-sister Kelly (Alice Evans), a slinky firecracker whose heavy-handed advances toward the impressionable young man lead to rain-drenched sex on a gabled roof as Maureen and Oliver take their vows below.
Soon there are clues, including some strange blood-pressure medication and an incriminating photograph, suggesting the newlyweds engineered Patrick's death. And what of Oliver's previous wife, who also died mysteriously? Goaded on by Kelly's bright-eyed carnality and his own anger-fueled confusion, Scott discovers family secrets that even half-awake auds will have sussed an hour before.
The kind of movie where characters say things like, "Let me kiss you through the pain," and flutes play during tastefully composed dolly shots of soft-core copulation, pic is clearly fascinated by such genre touchstones as "Out of the Past," "Body Heat" and "Basic Instinct." Regrettably, East German-born helmer Klaus Menzel fails to grasp the sense of foreboding inevitability that made them work, preferring a style that might best be described as shallow indolence.
To their credit, thesps appear to be trying. Bisset shows quiet grace in the most underwritten role of the quartet, though much of her work is undercut by Garcia's often painfully self-conscious agitation. Though she's no Kathleen Turner or Sharon Stone, Evans provides the pic's focus as a femme fatale whose manipulative sexual energy would make Jane Greer blush; her third-act scenes with the appropriately oily Wilson hint at what the film might have been.
Fine widescreen work of d.p. Reinhart Peschke leads a tech package marred by Marc Grenville-Masson's unconvincing production design and John Du Prez' gratingly intrusive score. Pic was shot entirely in Puerto Rico in 2002.

From Piranha II through The Abyss  to Titanic , James Cameron  has demonstrated his affinity for the life aquatic. Hollywood 's King of the World adds depth, literally, to his immersion with a new 47-minute 3-D IMAX  nature doc, Aliens of the Deep.  Lurid title notwithstanding, this underwater exploration—organized by Cameron and some two and a half years in the making—is a Disney  co-pro that deploys canned scientific explanations and a cast of perky marine biologists to establish the requisite sense of theme park awe.
Cameron himself plays the Director, who, no laid-back Steve Zissou , orchestrates a fleet of four submersibles at something like two miles below the surface. "Here's the deal," he barks, breaking the surface of humanoid blandness. And it is a deal: De Niro-voiced sharks, CGI pilot fish, and even the sissified little SpongeBob  have nothing on the bizarre, apparently nameless creatures that Cameron and his crew discover—starting with a fabulously 3-D-friendly cellophane scarf that swims past the submersible porthole. Perhaps the most amazing sight in this often thrilling almost-feelie, which takes as its paradoxical subject the condition of life without light, is the incredible swarm of blind albino shrimps clustered around the smoking "chimneys" formed by volcanic eruptions from beneath the ocean floor. They're not exactly cute, although Disney will be battling Pixar  for rights to the miraculously iridescent, big-eyed, Bambi-eared octopus-ish whatsit that glows prettily for the camera and vanishes back into the deep.
