 The visual beauty of Lajos Koltai's "Fateless" is unmistakable, and also a bit disconcerting. This is, after all, a movie about the Holocaust, which follows a 14-year-old Jewish boy from Budapest to Buchenwald, where it lingers in mud, misery and death.  For films in this genre - which has grown steadily since Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List" was released in 1993 - the test of verisimilitude is usually the ostentatiously accurate rendering of horror. There is plenty of that in "Fateless," and yet one finds oneself noticing, along with the emaciated bodies and ambient cruelty, the delicacy of the light and the painterly composition of the frames.  There are several explanations for this, the most obvious of which may be that Mr. Koltai comes to directing (this is his first feature) after a long and distinguished career as a cinematographer, most notably in collaboration with Istvan Szabo on films like "Mephisto," "Colonel Redl" and "Sunshine."  Light is thus Mr. Koltai's natural idiom, as much as prose is for Imre Kertesz, who based the screenplay for "Fateless" on his autobiographical novel of the same title. Though I can only judge from the English translation, it seems that Mr. Kertesz, who won the Nobel Prize in literature in 2002, is a graceful, lyrical stylist whose writing is clearly another source of the film's beauty.  But Mr. Kertesz's rendering of his childhood experience, on the page and now on screen, is by no means an attempt to aestheticize an unredeemable chapter of history. It represents something stranger and, to those of us with only a secondhand or thirdhand knowledge of that history, more disturbing: a survivor's conviction that there were aspects of the experience itself that can only be described as beautiful.  Now, I should clarify that "Fateless" bears no resemblance to Roberto Benigni's "Life Is Beautiful," which turned a death camp into a theater of sentimental kitsch. It has more in common with "The Pianist," Roman Polanski's adaptation of Wladyslaw Szpilman's memoir of survival in the Warsaw Ghetto under Nazi occupation. The two films, indeed, rank among the best nondocumentary cinematic treatments of the Holocaust yet produced - dry as well as devastating, and illuminated by surprising flashes of absurdist humor that carry the authority of lived experience.  A mordant sense of the ridiculous pierces the gloom of "Fateless," a form of wit that seems to combine Jewish comic traditions with the wry fatalism common in small nations perpetually batted around by their larger imperial neighbors.  The hero, Gyorgy Koves (Marcell Nagy), nicknamed Gyuri, thinks of himself as both Jewish and Hungarian, and mocks a friend's attempt to determine an independent essence of Jewishness. Gyuri's father is a factory owner who, as the film begins, is about to be sent away to perform manual labor.  The full force of the German campaign against Jews arrived in Hungary later than in other countries, and Gyuri's neighbors and relatives seem bewildered and unprepared, fussing over irrelevancies and dispensing false reassurance. When Gyuri and some other boys are ordered off a city bus on the way to their work assignments, they take it as both an example of bureaucratic incompetence and something of a lark. The adults who join them are annoyed and indignant; nobody, at first, thinks to be scared.  Of course, the audience knows better, but Mr. Koltai, telling his story in short scenes punctuated by slow blackouts and linked by Ennio Morricone's occasionally bombastic score, tries to narrow the gap between Gyuri's perspective and ours. Although some of the incidents seem almost like set pieces of Holocaust literature (inevitably so, since part of Hitler's program was the standardization of destruction), "Fateless" has an uncanny freshness.  We may be familiar with this kind of story from books and other films, but for Gyuri everything is happening uniquely and for the first time. This makes it, crazily but also logically, an adventure as well as an ordeal. As he shrinks down to skin and bones, Gyuri's eyes seem to grow wider in his head, and they seem to register both terror and wonder.  In the camp, he finds kindness, in particular from a fellow Hungarian (Aron Dimeny). He also discovers that the ordinary course of life yields moments of pleasure. In his voice-over, he speaks of loving the hour of idleness between work and the nighttime roll call. He and the other inmates eat their vile rations not only with desperation, but with relish as well, when they discover a scrap of meat or a potato. The ability to wring such satisfactions from nearly absolute deprivation is one of the ways the prisoners hold on to their humanity.  And Gyuri, whose previous experience of the world is narrower than that of his older comrades, experiences "fatelessness" - the likelihood that his life will end at any moment - as a perverse form of freedom.  When fate returns him to Budapest, where more Jews survived than in most other European capitals, he finds that the incomprehension of the people who had stayed behind, and the persistence of normal life during his incarceration, make him nostalgic for Buchenwald.  It is on that almost incomprehensibly bittersweet note that "Fateless" ends, and the film's achievement is to make Gyuri's response to his experience not only credible, but also necessary.  To the modern viewer, watching movies about the Holocaust carries an inevitable element of solipsism: what would I have done? How would I have behaved? This is a way of normalizing and domesticating something that surpasses comprehension. The achievement of "Fateless" is to work in reverse, to show us what it might have been like to endure atrocity as a form of ordinary reality, which is exactly what is hardest to imagine.
Adapted from Nobel laureate Imre Kertész 's autobiographical novel of an Auschwitz  boyhood, the Hungarian film Fateless  has a remarkable absence of sentimentality. The movie is obviously artistic, but there are no cheap or superfluous effects. It's almost mystically translucent.
Fateless  is Lajos Koltai 's first film as a director, but he has a long and distinguished career as a cinematographer, including 14 films shot for István Szabó . One would expect Fateless  to have a look, and it does, albeit less pictorial than impressionistic. Koltai seems to have chosen his actors largely for their faces, including the sensitive moptop Marcell Nagy , who plays the 14-year-old protagonist Gyuri. Images dominate the narrative. The film's structure is elliptical, unfolding in a series of vignettes, beginning amid the falling leaves and the shabby, cluttered flats of a wanly enchanted Budapest .
Because Hungary  was a wartime ally of the Axis, the fate of the nation's Jews had its own particular logic. The Nazis and their local assistants didn't begin ghettoizing and deporting Hungary's 800,000 Jews until the late spring of 1944, and then only in the countryside. Not until a Nazi-backed coup overthrew the Hungarian government in October was Eichmann able to begin transporting Budapest's large and largely assimilated Jewish community to Auschwitz. These events are filtered both through the autumn light and Gyuri's schoolboy consciousness, as he ponders the meaning of the mysterious, overheard phrase "the common Jewish fate."
There's a rich lack of understanding as first, Gyuri's father is drafted for forced labor and then Gyuri, who has been removed from school and assigned some sort of wartime task, is arrested by a single gendarme, swept up in a random collection of Jews. From the protagonist's perspective, these events are not absurd so much as inexplicable. The prisoners are packed into trams and then cattle cars. For the most part, boredom and discomfort trump hysteria until they tumble onto the platform at Auschwitz. Koltai's palette turns to pale white and green and Gyuri has the illumination that he could be killed anywhere, anytime.
A good boy, Gyuri always tries to be rational and cooperative. He locks eyes with the corpse-like, faintly smiling SS officer who makes the initial selection and, lying that he is 16, avoids the gas chamber. The action jumps abruptly to Buchenwald , and then to an improvised "provincial" camp where he adjusts, after a fashion, to a buglike immersion in misery and disease. Befriended and several times saved by a fellow Hungarian, Gyuri is rejected by the Yiddish-speaking Jews who regard him as gentile and beaten by a Gypsy kapo who wears a rakish black beret; still, he lives for the magical dinner hour and remains oddly hopeful even as he dwindles to skeletal dimensions.
Koltai films this wretched place as a universe where the sun never shines and a tin plate of watery soup is the coin of the realm; his visual ideas can be quietly audacious. The prisoners are made to stand interminably, swaying on their feet as though praying, until the stripes of their uniforms become a hypnotic pattern. Gyuri's nighttime crawl to the latrine is shown as an epic journey through a gray sea of mud.
Fateless  will be inevitably compared to Schindler's List  and especially The Pianist ; while no single scene is as harrowing as the strongest moments in either of those movies, it's more sustained than either. The film is the least plot-driven and the most existential of Holocaust reconstructions, and its 140 minutes seem to pass in a flash. The SS abandons the camp and the prisoners briefly take charge. Suddenly the Americans are there and Gyuri finds himself taking a tram through war-scarred Budapest. For him, it's a sort of waking dream; the citizens regard him as they would a ghost. Running into a childhood friend, he picks up their last, pre- deportation conversation, and asks if she ever did learn what it was to be a Jew. (The answer, of course, is no.)
Kertész's actual title isn't Fateless  but Fatelessness —the book evokes a state of being and, like all great writing, is essentially unfilmable. There's no way to fully capture Gyuri's voice—his alertness, good nature, and bizarrely calm Candide-like innocence. Yet as restrained as Koltai is, he sets up the novel's unforgettable ending. Experiencing a shock of homesickness, Gyuri recalls "the happiness of the camps" and wonders if he should tell people about that, "if I don't forget it myself." This isn't a movie that I'd have thought possible; it's an auspicious opening for the new year.
