         Georgia Lee's family dramedy "Red Doors" owes something to Chekhov and something to "Family Guy." The angst-ridden Wongs are so weird they transcend their Asian identity. The issues confronting them — the suicidal impulses of Dad (Tzi Ma) or the hip-hop vendetta perpetrated by daughter Katie (Kathy Shao-Lin Lee) against the boy next door — are of the type that make you forget you're watching a film in which Chinese-ness is supposed to be so paramount.
 
 
 FOR THE RECORD:



         






    'Feast': In Sept. 22's Calendar section, a photograph with a review of the movie "Feast" showed actress Krista Allen. Her first name was misspelled in the caption as Kirsta. —
 

 
  Following Woody Allen, Ang Lee and any number of sitcoms, Georgia Lee constructs her well-shot, well-written film around three daughters — two overachievers (Jacqueline Kim, Elaine Kao) and a rebel — who are trying to find happiness. Dad, meanwhile, keeps trying to check out, either because he's retired, or because he spends much of his time in front of a VCR, watching his daughters as then-happy children. He shouldn't feel so down. It's all a lot more upbeat than he thinks.
 
 "Red Doors" 
(R for brief sexual content) Running time: 1 hour, 30 minutes. Exclusively at Laemmle's Playhouse, 673 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena, (626) 844-6500; Town Center, 17200 Ventura Blvd., Encino, (818) 981-9811; Music Hall, 9036 Wilshire Blvd., Beverly Hills, (310) 274-6869.
 
  Documentary is hard to embrace

 
  Compiled with reverence and mixed with distance by director Jan Kounen, the clips that make up "Darshan, the Embrace" follow a journey of several weeks in the life of Indian teacher/guru Amma, a world-famous spiritualist and winner of the Gandhi King Prize for her work among the poor. Amma, whose preachings inspire massive gatherings of disciples (many of them caught on film here), has lobbied around the world for hospitals, orphanages and housing in her country, and when she makes her annual pilgrimage through India, people line up for hours for her darshan
, or tender, loving embrace. To date she has blessed 26 million followers with her darshan
.
 
  While Amma's teachings of love, inner peace and Karma, or action, resonate in the film — obviously, Amma is a woman called to God — her background remains pretty much a mystery. Less National Geographic and more personal history would have added a dimension to "Darshan."
 
 "Darshan, the Embrace" 
(unrated) Running time: 1 hour, 32 minutes. Exclusively at Laemmle's Monica, 1332 2nd St., Santa Monica (310) 394-9741; Regency's Academy, 1003 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena, (626) 229-9400.
 
 Project Greenlight famine continues

 
  The third (and apparently final) feature film to come from the Project Greenlight contest and television series, in which aspiring writers and directors win the chance to make a film under the vague tutelage of executive producers Matt Damon and Ben Affleck, "Feast" brings the score to TV 3, movies 0. That the making-of television show has consistently yielded better viewing than the films ostensibly being made raises the question of how many other unsatisfying movies are the result of production turmoil with more narrative continuity and dramatic heft than the results that make it to the big screen.
 
  Written by Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton and directed by John Gulager, "Feast" was Project Greenlight's first foray into genre filmmaking, with a story about a group of people in a middle-of-nowhere bar besieged by creatures intent on their demise.
 
  The monsters themselves are rarely seen clearly enough to appreciate, and a moment in which two of them are spied procreating is odd, to be sure, but only highlights the uncertain-to-schizophrenic tone of the film. What presumably began as a more straightforward story of siege and standoff has apparently been retrofitted into horror-comedy mode in a vain attempt to paper over inconsistencies and lack of scares.
 
  This is easily one of the most visually incoherent films to hit theaters in quite some time, as the who-doing-what-where of the action sequences comes across as a confusing jumble of splintering wood, flailing arms and snarling snouts. It would be dizzying if it weren't so annoying. A sad farewell to the promising Project Greenlight concept, this "Feast" leaves viewers with nothing satisfying to tuck into.
 
 "Feast" 
(R for pervasive strong creature violence and gore, language, some sexuality and drug content) Running time: 1 hour, 28 minutes. Friday and Saturday at midnight, Laemmle's Playhouse, 673 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena, (626) 844-6500; Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., West Hollywood, (323) 848-3500; Vista, 4473 Sunset Drive (at intersection of Sunset and Hollywood boulevards), Los Feliz, (323) 660-6639.   

This splatter primer from Project Greenlight -anointed director John Gulager annotates itself raw with self-awareness and winky excess but its glimmers of true ramshackle abandon are decidedly throwaway (an impromptu amputation here, a face giddily ripped off there). Spazzing through its archetypal narrative (fractious strangers, trapped in a seedy building, fend off beasties), Feast  isn't quite demented enough to reach Raimi-an heights, but Gulager uses parts of the monster-movie buffalo even the buffalo didn't know existed.


Its production already the subject of cable reality skein "Project Greenlight's" third season, monster mash "Feast" is getting a further boost prior to its Oct. 17 DVD release via nationwide latenight hardtop screenings Sept. 22-23. Combo should make this Halloween season a lucrative one for a movie that isn't distinctive enough in concept or execution to require full theatrical rollout, but will pass the time painlessly enough for stay-at-home horror enthusiasts. 
Pic immediately introduces characters via freeze-frame -- mostly strangers, all hanging out at a crummy desert saloon -- and a few onscreen vital statistics (including estimated life expectancy). They're a surly lot stewing slowly in a sleazy setting.
Collective energy level jumps a few notches when designated Hero (Eric Dane) kicks open the door, bloodied, wielding a shotgun and a decapitated creature's head. "These things are comin', they're hungry and we're next. ... Unless you people want to die, you'll do what I say and you'll do it fast," he gasps, to general eye-rolling.
Moments later, one "thing" has laid waste to Hero, whose life expectancy did not live up to its billing (setting the general snarky, genre-convention-ribbing tone). His wife, Heroine (Navi Rawat), rolls through the door next and helps batten down the hatches.
Another attack by the hairy, speedy and carnivorous thingies leaves several cast members dead or wounded, and one creature temporarily trapped in an ice chest.
Those left to argue over survival tactics include a chesty blonde waitress (Jenny Wade); a slightly less-so brunette (Krista Allen); an elderly female boozebag (Eileen Ryan); the crusty bartender (Clu Gulager, helmer's father); the oily bar owner (Duane Whitaker); a yuppie motivational trainer (Henry Rollins); a swaggering young pool hustler (Balthazar Getty); and his wheelchair-bound brother (Josh Zuckerman). Then there's the chubby beer delivery guy (Judah Friedlander), who's been heavily slimed by one of the aliens and fast develops some truly outrageous hygiene problems.
Basically throwing together familiar horror ideas without focusing on any in particular, "Feast" hopes its wild tone will compensate for the lack of distinctive characters or ideas. Pic's main models are the first two "Evil Dead" films, and perhaps "From Dusk Till Dawn." But "Feast" lacks the confidently gonzo camera choreography of all three.
Helmer John Gulager does keep things moving, albeit too often in a blur -- the camera lunging too close to the action, leaving us frequently confused as to who is being attacked by what and how. Nor do we ever get a firm grasp on the looks and capabilities (don't even ask about the origins) of those creatures, beyond basic factoids that they are several, nasty, and they come in different sizes.
Pic boasts a couple amusingly perverse reversals of fortune, and one good if fleeting set piece involving human bait and an elusive extension cord. Otherwise, "Feast" is forgettable fun for the undiscriminating.
Playing variably tongue-in-cheek characters we're not expected to care about, the thesps go through their paces with as much brio as the hectic situations and less-than-sparking dialogue allow. Design contribs are OK, though the pic doesn't really pause long enough to develop atmosphere.
Soundtracked rock tunes by a no-name artists are loud, mediocre, and plentiful.
