'Fighting" has a dumb title and a story as old as dirt (he fights, he loves, he wins!). But "Fighting" also has real grit and excellent acting. In other words, there is gold in that dirt. The movie courses with the crazy energy and urban life that usually get sapped out of these tales of men beating the life out of each other. This one feels almost electrically authentic.
The stars create people instead of action figures. That seems right since so much of this movie, directed and co-written by Dito Montiel, is comfortable with the rhythms of inaction  - watching, talking, waiting. Channing Tatum plays Shawn MacArthur, an  Alabama-born hawker of cheap merchandise in New York. Terrence Howard plays Harvey Boarden, the schemer who whisks him into the lucrative underworld of gloveless street pummeling.
Howard talks in a high, whiny singsong, and his hair is back to that almost-marcelled 
S-Curl 
sheen. He's the most effortlessly charismatic man in the movies. But he rarely gets to connect that suaveness to the flesh and bone of a persuasively drawn character.
Harvey is as much a pimp as the one Howard played in "Hustle & Flow." This one is a sad failure, too, the sort who had big dreams but wound up with this life instead. He's also a manipulator, cajoling the self-confident Shawn to consider throwing his fights. Harvey says he's from Chicago, yet there's a lot of Nathan Detroit in there, as well as Ratso Rizzo and some part Marlon Brando never got to play 30 years ago.
Tatum, meanwhile, comes from the same handsome-boy modeling school that's brought us Paul Walker, Josh Hartnett, and Ryan Reynolds. Yet his intensity  - especially when he's watching other actors, namely the wonderful Zulay Henao, who plays a standoffish nightclub waitress  - also makes you think about young Stallone, Brando, and Rourke.
The movie throws a villain our way, a cocky amateur wrestler (Brian White) from Shawn's shady past. I wish Montiel, who wrote the film with Robert Munic, had lowered the volume on the character's villainy, but White does solid work with an empty part. He just doesn't get to be as vivid or funny as Roger Guenveur Smith and Luis Guzman, who play sleazebag business partners, or Altagracia Guzman as Henao's deceptively dotty granny. Her natural comic timing is to die for. Between this movie and 2002's "Raising Victor Vargas," she's our new Catherine Scorsese.
"Fighting" brings us a New York that Hollywood rarely gets around to anymore. The nightclubs feel like nightclubs. The tiny housing-project apartments in Brooklyn are cramped. The contests look as if the dudes fighting them are really hurting each other. The fights themselves consist of two men, a rowdy crowd, bets that can get astronomical. The venues are homemade. One happens in an upstairs room of what looks like a church. Another is in a lot behind a Bronx bodega.
There is no ring to contain the chaos. Yet while the fights are grueling and merciless, they are not as lawlessly sadistic as the ones in, say, last year's "Never Back Down." In fact, what surrounds several of these confrontations is the sort of comedy you find in old-fashioned cafeteria brawls: amused exclamations about the general unprettiness of the fighters' form. This isn't boxing. It's fighting. It's also funny. One brawl ends early after a homegirl shoots a bystander in the ear. What? He spilled beer on her.
Montiel, whose first film was 2006's autobiographical "A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints" (better title, lesser movie, also with Tatum), is more in his element here, working with fewer family-melodrama clichés and delving deep into New York's pores. It takes gumption to set half your movie under the city's shaky sidewalk scaffolds. It takes even more to stage your climax on the terrace of a banker's Wall Street high-rise. Metaphor or not, the beating that transpires there gets at a certain recession-era fury. Sometimes you just want to throw a jerk through a sheet of drywall.
.

Murderously dull stretches of dialogue suck most of the fun out of this sloppy drama about a country boy (Channing Tatum) trying to make a buck in the big city by moonlighting as an underground prizefighter. To be fair, they didn't call the movie Talking . The bare-knuckle smackdowns at the heart of Fighting  are crowd-pleasers: spasms of clumsy grappling and butcher-shop sound effects that all but knock the wind out of you. And Tatum, a putty-face hunk with a neck like a ham hock, shows an offhand ease on camera that would've come in handy if he were playing an actual character instead of a life-size Rock 'Em Sock 'Em Robot. C–

 You might expect a movie called “Fighting” to be a blunt, literal affair, and in the case of Dito Montiel’s new film, you would not be wrong. Without undue fuss or grandiosity, it tells the story of Shawn MacArthur (Channing Tatum), a muscular young fellow from Birmingham, Ala., who comes to the big city and, well, fights.  From an impromptu street brawl near Rockefeller Center (where he is trying to sell phony iPods and pirated Harry Potter books), Shawn works his way through the underground fight clubs in different neighborhoods, where well-heeled patrons of various ethnicities (Russian in Brooklyn, Hispanic in the Bronx) pay money to watch guys punch one another.  The bouts themselves are not badly executed. They are, in effect, musical numbers, choreographed with a certain brutish wit. And the simple plot of “Fighting” seems also to belong to an old musical about a humble young man chasing big dreams on tough streets. Or, more to the point, the picture is a pugilistic cousin to the “Step Up” dance-competition franchise, which helped put Mr. Tatum’s career on its upward trajectory.  And even though he is still young and a little raw, Mr. Tatum (who also appeared in “A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints,” Mr. Montiel’s debut film) has what it takes to be a real movie star. Not just an impressive physique and the physicality of a young Marlon Brando, but also a surprising sensitivity, a lightness of manner that makes him credible even in preposterous situations.  Not everything that happens in “Fighting” entirely makes sense — it’s a fable, after all, and a fable doesn’t necessarily have to — but it breathes with a rough, exuberant realism that you rarely see in movies of its kind. This is partly a result of its having been filmed on actual, unprettified New York locations, rather than on Canadian streets that, while perfectly pleasant, could never be Manhattan.  As he showed in the hectic, heartfelt and achingly autobiographical “Guide to Recognizing Your Saints,” Mr. Montiel has an almost limitless affection for ordinary sidewalks, coffee shops and apartment buildings. (His interior locations are authentically cluttered and narrow, something you don’t often see in New York-set movies released by major studios.)  The aerial shots of the city, in contrast, seem dull and superfluous. The characters in “Fighting” are not flying around in planes or lounging on penthouse terraces — though Shawn does have a climactic fight in a half-renovated luxury apartment high above Wall Street — and Mr. Montiel’s heart beats strongest at street level, where people are engaged in an endless, restless hustle.  A lot of that hustle consists of killing time, waiting for something to happen. And it is in its slackest moments that the real poetry of “Fighting” breaks through. Mr. Montiel has an odd, stuttery sense of pacing, an eccentric, almost haphazard approach to framing and a fondness for loosely structured scenes driven by improvised dialogue. Either he has no idea what he’s doing or he’s in possession of a vividly idiosyncratic directing style. Having been unexpectedly delighted by “Saints” and “Fighting” —  which both swim through seas of cliché and emerge sparkling and fresh — I’m inclined to choose the second  possibility.  Not that “Fighting” is a great movie. It has no desire to be one — not an ounce of grandiosity or pretension or melodramatic overstatement. To be sure, there’s a lot of drama. Shawn is brought into the fight scene by a semisuccessful underworld fixer named Harvey (Terrence Howard), who is mixed up with some much rougher characters, including Martinez  (Luis Guzmán) and Jack (Roger Guenveur Smith), who was surely an honor student at the Christopher Walken Academy of Curious Diction. Shawn falls for a pretty nightclub waitress named Zulay (Zulay Henao) and also runs into Evan (Brian White), a rival from back home who brings up troubling memories.  None of this especially matters. The story goes pretty much exactly where you expect it to, but the story is really beside the point. Mr. Montiel is certainly in no hurry to tell it, and he lingers over his scenes, holding them open so that the actors can walk around, have a snack and explore the odd corners of their characters.  Mr. Howard has a fine time trying out Peter Lorre-like intonations, and he and Mr. Tatum connect like Joe Buck and Ratso Rizzo in a cleaned-up update of “Midnight Cowboy.” Everyone else rambles, mumbles and kibitzes, and every once in a while Altagracia Guzman  (“Raising Victor Vargas”) shows up, playing Zulay’s grandmother, and walks off with a scene as if it were a suitcase full of money sitting unattended on the table.  By the end, some actual suitcases full of money show up, but “Fighting” is one of the most relaxed movies about chasing after a big payday that I’ve ever seen. Its ambitions are modest, and it doesn’t pursue them with excessive zeal, which may be why, improbably, it feels like a winner.  “Fighting” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has fighting.

A one-way ticket to Palookaville, "Fighting" stars up-and-comer Channing Tatum as a kid with a past and a wicked right, and resurrects two old Hollywood standbys -- '40s fight dramas and graffiti-splattered, pre-Giuliani New York. This helps make the surroundings in director Dito Montiel's ham-fisted drama feel as familiar as its plot, although Terrence Howard's apparent Christopher Walken impersonation qualifies as something new. Pic's loser-triumphant plotline should leave auds at ringside moderately happy.
Montiel (who debuted with the 2006 fest fave "A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints") is back on familiar turf in New York, although it's less the New York of today than the one in which he grew up. That makes it feel no more authentic than if it had been created on a Hollywood lot (the midtown locations chosen must have caused some headaches).
Around these oh-so-mean streets lumbers Alabama boy Shawn MacArthur (Tatum), who has the physical mannerisms and disoriented look of a homeless guy: an ill-fitting wifebeater, an inability to keep anything buttoned and a blanket full of books he tries to sell down the street from Radio City Music Hall. There, he's robbed by a pack of street wretches under the dubious employ of Harvey Boarden (Howard).
Watching Shawn cold-cock his Fagin's gang, Harvey recognizes that Shawn is a talented fighter and -- imagine the coincidence -- Harvey is connected to an underground, bare-knuckle fighting network that involves Wall Street knuckleheads, Korean transvestites, Tong warlords, designer-knockoff merchants and Bronx bodega owners. The whole city, essentially. It takes all of three fights -- one of which he wins by banging a Russian's head against a drinking fountain -- for Shawn to become the biggest illegal attraction in town.
Of course, the illicit powers that be want Shawn to take a dive -- against extreme-fighting star Evan Hailey (Brian White), who was a member of Shawn's father's wrestling team back in Alabama (imagine the coincidence). They hate each other. Take a dive? We'll see about that.
For all the utter phoniness of "Fighting" -- the cockeyed, faux-verite shooting, the lurches in storytelling, the lack of character development, a contrived crisis between Shawn and his would-be girlfriend Zulay (Zulay Henao) and Tatum's dopey-charming thing--"Fighting's" not so bad. The Walken influence on Howard wasn't a joke -- he plays Harvey as too civilized, too gentle, a guy who enunciates everything a bit too clearly, and all the while you're wondering when he's going to blow like a manhole cover. Even if he never does, he imposes a sense of suspense. Harvey's nemeses -- played by Anthony DeSando, Luiz Guzman and Roger Guenveur Smith (who's also doing Walken!) -- are one-dimensional by contrast, though White's Evan is delightfully hateful.
The fights are edge-of-your-seat kinetic, and coordinator Mike Gunther has worked a lot of traditional wrestling moves into Shawn's technique. He may look like a bum, but he fights like a college boy.
Production values are adequate.

The face of Mike Tyson  stares out from the screen like a sentry—intent, sober, watchful. The camera sits close, the framing is tight, and as we lock eyes with the former heavyweight champ who could shatter an opponent's confidence with little more than a glance, he seems to look past us into some unfathomable void. "The first question we ask is, 'Who am I?' " says the voice—unmistakable, unusually soft and high for a man—at the start of Tyson . It is a question Tyson asks of himself many more times over the following 90 minutes, although the closest thing to an answer comes relatively early, in an excerpt from an interview given by the boxer when he was still a teenage phenom on the rise: "Nobody really knows Mike Tyson." Nobody, including Mike Tyson himself.
Directed by James Toback , who previously cast Tyson in his dramatic features Black and White  and When Will I Be Loved , Tyson  isn't a traditional documentary portrait so much as a feature-length interview, in which the retired boxer, save for a sprinkling of archival footage and a montage of his famous fights, remains front and center for the entire running time. The only talking head is his own, albeit one that speaks in multiple, sometimes self-contradictory voices. In recent nonfiction cinema, the film's closest precedents are the Austrian-made Blind Spot: Hitler 's Secretary  and Errol Morris 's Robert McNamara  tête-à-tête, The Fog of War . But whereas the former film had the feeling of a confession and the latter of an interrogation, Tyson  is more like a particularly riveting therapy session, with Tyson as both analyst and patient.
The movie covers a lot of ground, some of it familiar—Tyson's early years as a bullied, fatherless youth on the tough streets of Brownsville, Brooklyn ; the petty criminality that landed him in an upstate New York juvenile facility; the redemption that he found in the person of septuagenarian boxing trainer Cus D'Amato —but much of it not. Even boxing fans who feel they know everything there is to know about Tyson may be surprised by the bracing candor with which he dissects his desire to fight ("I was afraid of being that way again . . . of being physically humiliated in the street again"), his 1992 rape conviction on charges brought by Miss Black America  contestant Desiree Washington  ("that wretched swine of a woman"), and the 1997 Evander Holyfield  bout that ended with part of Holyfield's ear on the canvas ("I was totally insane at that moment"). Often, Tyson is most revealing when he doesn't intend to be, as when he refers to the $14 million settlement he received from his 2004 lawsuit against Don King  as "a small amount of money." Likewise, Toback's film is as absorbing for what it addresses directly as for its underlying and irresolvable questions of race, sexuality, and violence in American society.
In 1989's The Big Bang , his sole previous nonfiction film, Toback was frequently on camera asking his subjects about the origins of the universe and the nature of existence. In Tyson —a movie about a cosmos of one—Toback smartly gets out of the way of his powerhouse subject in a manner that many a more seasoned documentarian would have been too predetermined to do. Probably, Tyson did not require much prompting—he has the air of a man eager to unburden himself. What he did need—what Tyson  would have been unthinkable without—was someone he could talk to; a fellow traveler on the path of obsession and desire who could wear down the calluses Tyson has built up over decades spent as a mass-media punching bag; someone willing to take Mike Tyson explicitly on his own terms.
Those terms are constantly in flux, for Tyson is nothing if not a Heisenbergian particle, like all the surrogate Bob Dylans  of I'm Not There  rolled into one—and Toback is much too smart to pretend to give us "the Mike Tyson we never knew" or any similarly reductive postulation. Toback doesn't come to lionize or to demonize, to goad his subject into a tearful breakdown (though Tyson does cry) or climactic Frost/Nixon  apologia, or even to suggest that Tyson has anything to apologize for in the first place. Instead, he gives us Iron Mike in all his monolithic multitudes and allows us, for a brief moment, to peer alongside him into the existential abyss.
No cosmic questions weigh upon Fighting , the second film by director Dito Montiel , whose 2006 debut, A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints , was the sort of crude but fascinating object you might find in an exhibition of naïf art. Adapted by Montiel—a former hardcore punk musician—from his autobiographical novel about his teenage delinquency on the streets of Astoria, that movie was a ragged, misshapen mess, but its guttural power was undeniable. It was as if the movie had been kicking around violently in Montiel's head for decades. Fighting  feels like it's been kicking around somewhere for a while, too—in the office of a studio development executive eager to find more Fast and the Furious –style catnip for the urban adrenaline-junkie crowd.
