
Now that Madonna and Guy Ritchie have officially called it quits, all that remains is the issue of custody. Madge should get the children and the brassiere collection. Based on her directorial debut, Ritchie should get the filmmaking career.
To be fair, "Filth and Wisdom" is slightly better than most movies made by celebrated pop musicians, a hall of shame that includes Bob Dylan's "Renaldo and Clara," Prince's "Graffiti Bridge," and the Beatles' "Magical Mystery Tour." There's a narrative and some actual acting, and Madonna's long-established obsession with the power dynamics of sex and freedom gets a workout.
On the other hand, the quality of the writing and performances in "Filth and Wisdom" are of the let's-put-on-a-show variety, and the filmmaking is self-indulgence itself. Worst of all, the movie's simply not very shocking. Madonna has made a career out of toying with image and ego, but this is a vanity project in the smallest sense possible.
Her Nibs doesn't appear onscreen, but lucky for her she has a leading actor of real charisma: Eugene Hutz, frontman for the rollicking gypsy folk-punk collective Gogol Bordello and an occasional actor. (He was Elijah Wood's tour guide in "Everything Is Illuminated"). Hutz plays A.K., a Ukrainian immigrant musician in London who makes ends meet doling out gay S&M humiliation to paying clients. Rangy and unkempt, cigarette forever dangling beneath a resplendent handlebar moustache, A.K.'s a proudly foul-minded sybarite. Basically, he's Madonna as a man.
For all his nihilistic charm, though, he's madly in love with Holly (Holly Weston), a ballerina who turns to stripping to pay the rent. (The scenes in which the statuesque dancer tries to come to terms with the men's club pole are rather sweetly amusing.) Their friend Juliette (Vicky McClure) works for an unhappy Indian pharmacist (Inder Manocha) and yearns to help starving children in Africa. In the apartment below A.K. lives Professor Flynn (Richard E. Grant), a blind gay poet mired in depression.
Madonna pushes these characters this way and that - Grant, the most talented actor, fares the worst - trying to make vague statements about overcoming inhibitions and going for your dreams. Secondary characters, like one of A.K.'s clients (Elliot Levey) and his shrewish Jewish mountain of a wife (Hannah Walters), are caricatures out of a music video. "Filth and Wisdom" drops references (Gandhi, Juliette's Jean Seberg haircut) and Madonnian bon mots ("If you want to be saved, you've got to go to hell first") like self-consciously artistic rabbit pellets. It's a bit of a slog, innit?
After a while, even Hutz's sardonic gypsy act starts wearing thin, although the few glimpses we get of Gogol Bordello in action give the film a necessary lift. A.K. is fond of saying things like, "In my country, we have a saying: He who licks the knives will cut his tongue." In my country, we have a saying: Pop stars who make movies should stick to what they know.


In Madonna's directorial debut Filth and Wisdom , A.K. (Eugene Hutz), a gratingly boisterous Ukrainian gypsy with a Joseph Stalin mustache, turns to the camera to say that ''filth'' and ''wisdom'' are just alternate paths to the same Truth. That's a promising idea for a Madonna film, but this fragmented and genially campy ensemble comedy only rarely makes good on it. A.K. and his London flatmates moonlight in the sex trade: He's a dominatrix, Holly (Holly Weston) is a ballet dancer–turned–stripper, and shy Juliette (Vicky McClure) assists in S&M fantasy sessions. The movie is short on wisdom, but it might have gotten by if it had had better filth.

 Pop go the dialectics in “Filth and Wisdom,” a tale of bumping and grinding your way to happiness from the hardest-working hard body in show business, that precision sex-and-beat machine turned first-time movie director known as Madonna. Set in London, the loosely threaded 84-minute story written by the Big M and Dan Cadan (a former crew member for her soon-to-be ex, Guy Ritchie) involves three roomies who are peddling body and soul in order to follow their different dreams, all of which should sound familiar to the Madonna faithful: music, dance and ... saving impoverished African children.  Though she might be in an autobiographical mood, Madonna never appears on camera (two of her songs get a workout), letting the low-profile cast go through the motions and emotions for her. First and foremost is A. K. (Eugene Hutz, of the self-styled Gypsy punk band Gogol Bordello), a Ukrainian musician who earns his keep British style by punishing naughty (adult) boys and dressing up in women’s clothing. A charismatic string bean adorned with gold hoop earrings and a kitten-sized mustache,  A. K. shares a flat with Holly (Holly Weston), a ballerina with no discernable personality, and Juliette (Vicky McClure), a pharmacist’s aide whose obsession with African children leads to the worst line (and idea) in a movie this year: “She don’t know she’s starving too,” explains A. K.  She’s not really, though you might fervently wish that she were if not for the playful Mr. Hutz, who, whether loping through London or ogling the camera, lightens this otherwise heavy endeavor.  Seriousness per se isn’t the problem (never is); the problem is the air of self-consciousness about being serious (or being taken as such), a tendency that has plagued Madonna’s own acting ever since her breezy 1985 breakout in “Desperately Seeking Susan.” That self-consciousness weighs on “Filth and Wisdom,” creating moments that are as cringe-inducing — Richard E. Grant as a professionally sensitive blind poet pulling books off his shelves in a rage — as the ill-advised director’s statement in which she name-drops Jean-Luc Godard, Pier Paolo Pasolini and Luchino Visconti.  Well, better Visconti than most. “Filth and Wisdom” is a ridiculously easy target, but it also creaks and strains with more ambition than most mainstream throwaways that just recycle the usual guns and poses. Not that Madonna has gone in for originality, which isn’t really her thing: rather, instead of repurposing a genre, she has riffled through the art-house catalog for inspiration, as evidenced by the film’s intentionally grubby visual texture, jumpy editing, direct-address commentary, freeze frames and other tricks. Although the somewhat rough visual style doesn’t feel especially organic or natural for a director who has built a slick international brand with mind-blowing calculation, it does keep you interested from scene to scene, which is a more generous compliment than it might seem.  As to that story: A. K. pines for Holly, who remains oblivious until she learns to love herself or something by becoming a pole dancer at a men’s club. Juliette learns something else, though I’m not sure what, partly by ducking and then embracing her infatuated boss, Sardeep (Inder Manocha), an Indian immigrant with a noisy brood and a jealous wife (Shobu Kapoor).  Madonna spices up these human ingredients and others with light bondage and grave affirmations (there’s even some marital advice), and while her movie meanders hither and yon, it all works out because life is a giant virgin-whore paradox and filth leads to wisdom and wisdom leads to filth and Gogol Bordello leads to a merry blowout with horn blasts and yelps. 

Claiming the films of Godard, Visconti, Pasolini and Fellini as her inspiration, Madonna hopes to "one day make something that comes close to their genius," according to the press notes for "Filth and Wisdom." On the evidence of this, her directorial debut, that day is a long way off. Ineptly written and helmed story of three Londoners, although quite bad, does have a few redeeming features. Madonna's name will ensure some kind of distribution, but her already abundant riches won't get any filthier off this.
Story revolves around three flatmates living in London. Ukrainian-born aspiring musician A.K. (Eugene Hutz

), haunted by memories of an abusive father, now dominates and humiliates pervs for pay. Ballet dancer Holly (Holly Weston), for whom A.K. carries a weighty torch, tries her hand at pole dancing to raise extra cash at A.K.'s suggestion. Finally, pharmacy assistant Juliette (Vicky McLure) dreams of going to Africa to help starving children and thus escape some poorly explicated family strife.
Desultory plot is apparently crafted to illustrate A.K.'s to-camera and voiceover musings that "filth and wisdom are two sides of the same coin." In other words, one needs to wallow in the former to obtain the latter. Some auds may construe a Kabbalistic insight in this, although pic's fortune-cookie philosophy seems more akin to that of Madonna during her "Erotica" album and "Sex" book era, which extolled the supposedly liberating aspects of exhibitionism and kinkiness-as-cool.
For instance, Holly frets far more about whether she'll ever master the art of pole dancing than whether the job itself is inherently humiliating and embedded in a sleazy industry that treats women like dirt. Meanwhile, A.K.'s S&M sessions are played, perhaps more forgivably, strictly for laughs, and are even seen to rescue the failing marriage of one client (Elliot Levey).
Script credited to Madonna and Dan Cadan (whose credits list work as a runner and then as an EPK helmer for films made by Madonna's husband, Guy Ritchie) is poorly structured and cheese-ripe with clunky dialogue. Still, the occasional not-half-bad line of dialogue rouses hopes that pic might improve by the end (A.K. opines early on that "the problem with having a cash box in your body is that you always feel empty even when it's full"). Alas, pic only goes downhill after that.
Having contributed to arguably the worst films of some other big-name helmers (i.e. Warren Beatty's "Dick Tracy," John Schlesinger's "The Next Best Thing" and Abel Ferrara's "Dangerous Game"), Madonna seems to have learned little about directing from her experiences in filmmaking. Her stylistic approach seems most akin to that of late-'80s/early-'90s pop videos, wherein story is often revealed without dialogue in music-backed montages, the likes of which abound here. It's as if she's taken her video for "Papa Don't Preach" as her main dramaturgical template.
On the plus side, however, the many tunes featured here by gypsy-punk beat combo Gogol Bordello, for whom lead actor Hutz is the frontman, are cracking little numbers.
Hutz himself reps another plus, chock-full of rock-star charisma and the only man in living memory besides Daniel Day-Lewis in "Gangs of New York" who can make a handlebar moustache sexy. Co-stars Weston and McLure are skilled enough to muddle through despite helmer's manifest lack of skill, evinced by the caricatured perfs from the rest of the cast, including Richard E. Grant in an admittedly awful role as a "tragic" blind gay man.
Graceless editing further mars the tech package as a whole, while needlessly jiggly handheld lensing contributes to the pic's generally cheap look.
Check out the Pushy Questions with Eugene Hutz.




A splashy Berlin Film Festival  premiere may not have been the ideal launch strategy for this modestly scaled first feature co-written and directed by Madonna, which arrives in the U.S. having been torn limb from celluloid limb by Euro critics. Apparently, they didn't get the memo—included in the press notes—in which the Material Girl  says that while she has "always been inspired by the films of Goddard [sic], Visconti, Passolini [sic] and Fellini," she expects it will be some time before she's able to "make something that comes close to their genius." Genius isn't the strong suit of Filth & Wisdom , but there's an undeniably funky charm and abiding can-do spirit to this loose-knit portrait of three London flatmates trying to make their way in the world. Ukrainian-born singer-songwriter A.K. (played with enormous charisma by Gogol Bordello  frontman Eugene Hutz ) pounds the music-biz pavement while holding down a day job as a male dominatrix. Meanwhile, dancer Holly (Holly Weston) turns to stripping in a seedy "gentlemen's club" when ballet no longer pays the bills, and pharmacist Juliette (Vicky McClure ) endures leering stares from her married boss while saving up to work as a nurse in Africa. The not-unwise showbiz moral here is that to get what you want out of life, you have to get your hands dirty. Message to the director: Don't quit your day job just yet, but in the category of multidisciplinary artists moonlighting as filmmakers, I'll take you over Julian Schnabel  any day.
