
When two characters are as fundamentally dislikable as the gambling-addict TV writer and his prostitute niece in "Finding Amanda," a movie had better find ways to make us care. Insight or a spark of wit would be nice, as would performances that go beneath the surface to cast light on any underlying psychology.
"Finding Amanda," unfortunately, is one vast, irritating surface. The first feature film directed by Peter Tolan - a long-established writer of TV shows ("The Larry Sanders Show," "Rescue Me") and movies ("Analyze This," "Analyze That") - it shows a pampered TV sensibility utterly failing to come to grips with the failings of actual humans.
Maybe the issue is that Tolan's carving too close to the bone. Matthew Broderick plays a once-successful TV writer named Taylor Mendon, whose latest sitcom is universally hated and whose marriage to the long-suffering Lorraine (Maura Tierney) is hanging by a thread. Taylor has a gambling problem. Much worse is his refusal to see that it is a problem.
In the opening scenes, as the hero skips work to hit the track and lightheartedly lies to his wife as he loses bet after bet, "Finding Amanda" taps into a rich and real vein of middle-aged male delusion. Then Taylor hightails it to Vegas - supposedly to rescue his 20-year-old niece Amanda (Brittany Snow) from a life of hookerdom but really to lose himself at the tables - and the movie flirts with becoming "Leaving Las Vegas" with betting instead of booze.
Because Tolan is stuck in the key of comedy, though, "Amanda" never connects with its darker and more sorrowful impulses. Instead, it just turns nasty. When Taylor finally finds his niece - shopping for tricks by a casino elevator - she turns out to be an airhead for whom prostitution represents empowerment and personal happiness. Everything about her life suggests she's wrong: Her new house is an empty shell and her creep boyfriend (Peter Facinelli) is shagging other women. But who is Taylor to lecture her on the moral high road?
The movie's tone is glib and the acting frustratingly one-note. Snow simply doesn't have the talent necessary to take her character deeper, and while Broderick does, his patented comic breeziness never falters even when the script implies it should. The result is, hands down, the actor's shallowest performance. Tolan even brings on the great British goon Steve Coogan as a pit boss - and wastes him.
Toward the end, "Finding Amanda" tries to rouse itself to come to a point. "You can't help people who don't want to be helped," someone says, and there's a bit of chatter about those of us who consistently make wrong life choices. A more interesting theme - why some people embrace their most destructive tendencies - goes unaddressed in all the fun. Tolan's real subject is self-loathing, but it's possible he's too close to actually focus on it.


 If the title “Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas” didn’t already belong to Hunter S. Thompson, it would perfectly fit Peter Tolan’s viciously funny satire, “Finding Amanda.” Set mostly in Sin City, it offers a through-the-looking-glass vision of confused Americans losing their already shaky bearings in the world’s gaudiest honky-tonk.  On the ground floor of a luxury hotel, the title character (Brittany Snow), a perky, wholesome-looking 20-year-old blonde, cheerfully accosts potbellied middle-aged tourists for quickie oral sex as they step out of the elevator. When her sad-sack uncle, Taylor Mendon (Matthew Broderick), arrives from Pasadena to beg Amanda to go into rehab (although she insists she doesn’t take drugs, except for the occasional tab of Ecstasy), she excuses herself for a few minutes to turn a quick trick with a geezer in a Stetson hat.  Amanda boasts that she can earn more in one weekend servicing eight customers than she made in a month working at the International House of Pancakes. And the work is so easy, she chirps. She has even bought a house. In a nasty running joke, no one believes Taylor when he introduces himself as Amanda’s uncle. The assumption that he is a pesky john lands him in trouble with security guards and pimps eager to demonstrate their protective gallantry to the pretty lady.  “Finding Amanda” is an easy movie to reject because its microcosm of a society obsessed with commercial sex and fast money is so relentlessly, uncomfortably and casually dark. Everyone is for sale, even the garishly attired middle-aged bartender at  the Aztec casino who wrongly assumes that Taylor is referring to him when  he asks about finding paid companionship.  The only comparably cynical recent film set in Las Vegas was Peter Berg’s savage 1998 comedy, “Very Bad Things,” in which a bachelor party  takes a tragic turn. That film wasn’t as funny as “Finding Amanda,” because the dialogue, sharp as it was, lacked the absurdist razor edge of this curdled screwball comedy. Here the characters’ outlandish utterances (especially Amanda’s) will make you gasp.  Mr. Broderick’s Taylor is an updated version of a Dudley Moore character on a bender, but sadder and far less energetic. An about-to-be-fired writer for a failing sitcom,  he is a recovering alcohol, drug and gambling addict and congenital liar whose wife, Lorraine (Maura Tierney), throws him out after he lies to her about betting at the track. Underneath everything, he is a befuddled 43-year-old lost boy who knows right from wrong but is helpless in the throes of his gambling addiction.  Taylor decides to find his niece to placate Lorraine by demonstrating his selflessness. But the trip is really an excuse to revisit Las Vegas and slip back into his old ways. Because he used to be a big-time loser in the hotel’s casino, he is welcomed like a returning hero. His credit card having been taken away, he finances his gambling binge with a check stolen from Lorraine. As he wheedles more money from the casino host (Steve Coogan), his compulsion crushes his common sense.  The movie’s sleaziest character is Amanda’s monstrous live-in boyfriend, Greg (Peter Facinelli), a selfish tyrant who lives off Amanda, cheats on her in her house while she is away and smacks her around when she protests. After one beating she screams, “Don’t ever hit me again!” and he furiously retorts, “Don’t make me!”  Two-thirds of the way in,  “Finding Amanda” takes a screeching turn into pathos in a scene  where Amanda’s happy-go-lucky facade suddenly crumbles and her misery and self-loathing pour out. The smidgens of self-awareness that Taylor and Amanda exhibit make their destructive personal choices seem all the more appalling. The misanthrope in you will chortle;  these fools deserve every setback that comes their way and every laugh at their expense.  “Finding Amanda”  is rated  R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations, profanity and drug-taking.

Emerging relatively intact from a potentially sententious minefield, Peter Tolan's feature directorial debut, "Finding Amanda," profits greatly from the obvious roads not taken in its seriocomic treatment of addiction. Matthew Broderick regains his cinematic stride as a morosely wise-cracking television producer on the skids, ably abetted by Maura Tierney as his much-put-upon wife and Brittany Snow as his perky prostitute niece, Amanda. Although it avoids overt moralizing or clunky lesson-learning, pic's careful balancing act between tragedy and comedy eventually becomes its sole raison d'etre. Magnolia Pictures pickup may prove a hard sell for non-addicted auds. 
Broderick plays Taylor Mendon, a onetime hotshot TV producer whose drunken antics have landed him with a fifth-rate sitcom starring Ed Begley (ouch). Having given up drugs and booze, he clings to his one remaining addiction, gambling on the ponies. Helmer-scribe Tolan, co-creator with Dennis Leary of FX's "Rescue Me" (and writer of numerous other scripts for the smallscreen), has given Broderick a dreary alter ego, with none of Leary's electric jitteriness. By pic's opening, the only traces of dynamism left in Broderick's supposedly erstwhile golden boy are the cynical one-liners he utters, but even these are drowned in deadpan disinterest. All of Taylor's passion and personality are reserved for the track and the fickle permutations of fate enacted there.
As faithful wife Lorraine, Tierney typically layers her straightforward role with all manner of conflicted, painful emotions when she finally gets fed up with her husband's lies. Taylor decides to win Lorraine back by finding her errant niece, Amanda (Snow), who is reportedly hooked and hooking in Las Vegas, and encouraging her to enter rehab in Malibu.
Apprising his wife of his brilliant plan requires multiple phone calls, since she hangs up every time her triply addicted hubby leads off by saying, "I'm going to Las Vegas ... " In fact, she has sussed out the situation more clearly than her self-deluded spouse, who, upon arriving in Vegas, heads directly to the off-track betting machines, convincing a floor boss and longtime enabler (Steve Coogan, investing his smarmy, insincere schtick with a dollop of genuine class resentment) to honor his check.
Taylor finally gets around to finding Amanda, who's discovered cheerfully picking up tricks at a third-rate, Aztec-themed casino. Delighted to see him, Amanda chatters candidly about her work and proudly chauffeurs him in her snazzy new car to her "perfect" home to meet her "perfect" boyfriend, Greg (Peter Facinelli, somewhat one-note as a two-timing, quasi-sociopathic leech).
Decidedly bipolar in its approach to addiction, pic vacillates between the wryly catalogued behavioral tics of "Let It Ride" and the unremitting Sturm und Drang of "Leaving Las Vegas." The radical tonal swings (Amanda's jauntiness suddenly gives way to violence and wild weeping), though perhaps realistic on a clinical or even experiential level, continually play out as a cautious hedging of bets on Tolan's part, if not on the part of his self-destructive hero. Like a high-class sitcom, "Amanda" plays it both ways, as a cool, non-judgmental walk on the wild side and as a bottom-hitting learning experience.
Tech credits are polished.


Drop a gambler into Las Vegas  and of course he'll lose his shirt, but the how and why of it remain under-explored even after—dare I say because of?—Leaving Las Vegas . In its modest but incisive way, Peter Tolan 's jaunty comedy highlights everything that was self-indulgent, grandiose, and false about that overrated movie. As addicts go, second-tier television writer Taylor Peters  (Matthew Broderick , roly-poly and wry) is low-key and small potatoes in everything but the dough he fritters away while trying to win back his long-suffering wife (Maura Tierney ). This he attempts by traveling to Sin City to drag his niece (a terrific Brittany Snow ), a seemingly happy and house-proud hooker, to rehab. Written and directed with brio and rueful firsthand knowledge of his subject by Tolan, executive producer of the acclaimed television series Rescue Me  , the movie never falls into the jargon of denial or sets us morally above its quietly hapless protagonist. Instead, it puts us inside the deluded but impregnable inner logic that Taylor sustains from one self-inflicted calamity to the next. By keeping the tone light, the players human (Steve Coogan  has a nice turn as a greasy casino host), and never, ever romanticizing the addict, Finding Amanda  comes by its heartbreak honestly.
