
When Amanda (Lisa Brenner), the young corporate heroine in Lawrence D. Foldes's "Finding Home," gets a call informing her that her grandmother has died, she interrupts her birthday make-out with her boss (Johnny Messner) and travels from Manhattan to coastal Maine both for the burial and ''for closure." ''I always seem to be going around in circles, and now I'm circling back," she announces in the narration.
During her stay, Amanda gets to know her grandmother's good friend Katie (Genevieve Bujold). Together, they ran her grandmother's inn, the very one that has been bequeathed to Amanda. If that doesn't sound so impressive, all Amanda's mother, Grace (Jeanetta Arnette), inherits is a brooch. But the woman had it coming. When Amanda was a girl, Grace dragged her away from Grandma Esther, who's played in the movie's barrage of gauzy flashbacks by Louise Fletcher.
The occasion for flight was a devastating family secret whose disclosure came just as little Amanda was about to have her first kiss with Katie's nephew, Dave. Grace forbade Amanda from ever again contacting her grandmother. As a grown-up, Amanda has never faced the effects of this trauma -- until now. She starts with her mother (''Because of you, I haven't seen Grandma since I was 11"). But Mom is tough: ''Well, you certainly have developed a New York attitude!"
The movie eventually trades in its unhappy melodrama for the question of whether Amanda will keep or sell the inn. And will Amanda realize that her mother has misled her into believing that Dave (Misha Collins), who's grown into an attractive and sensitive handyman, had sexually assaulted the girl when they were kids?
''Finding Home" is well meant and earnest but is stretched to almost twice what would have been a comfortable length. Any movie with as many slow-motion shots of characters reaching for objects such as diaries or framed photographs has an editor who's on an extended coffee break. Foldes complicates his story further with blood, fistfights, shock pregnancies, and drunken sexual assault (no, another one). Over every scene the score swells and soars, and the sound design can be deafening.
The movie reaches its climax with the arrival of Amanda's macho boss, her best friend, her best friend's boyfriend, and her boss's lackey, a nerd played by grown-up Justin Henry, whom you might remember as the kid in ''Kramer Vs. Kramer." The actors playing these one-dimensional characters are a chore to watch.
Brenner's performance is particularly strange, as she appears to have done all her acting in the off-screen narration and none of it in front of the camera. She delivers her voice-over with whimsy and discomfort, as if she can't believe the words are coming out of her mouth. Amanda mentions a ''terrible, uncomfortable
 feeling attached to something I long
 for, something I terribly miss.
" (Does she know Hallmark makes a card for those occasions?)
In any case, what happens between these characters might be incredibly traumatic for them, but there's little in it for us.


Impeccably crafted but dramatically turgid, widescreen family drama "Finding Home" searches in vain for a level emotional foundation to anchor its technical opulence. Mainstream auds who value melodrama over subtlety could respond to bracingly old-fashioned values, and the movie does look gorgeous, indicating fair to decent biz in houses equipped to show off pic's chief strength and the finding of many homes in ancillary.
Hard-charging Madison Avenue exec Amanda (Lisa Brenner) is shaken to learn of the death of her estranged grandmother Esther (Louise Fletcher), who owned and operated the Cliffs Edge bed-and-breakfast on a spectacularly rugged, remote island off the coast of Maine. Interrupting a budding romance with boss Nick (Johnny Messner), she is persuaded -- albeit with strong misgivings -- by the inn's caretaker, Katie (Genevieve Bujold), to return for the first time since her childhood to clear up the estate.
From the moment she arrives on the island, it's clear something dramatic happened during her childhood that forced her removal by unpleasant mother Grace (Jeannetta Arnette). Fond memories of Esther fight for dominance with a series of jarring flashback remembrances: something about a knife, and blood, and Katie's nephew, now the caretaker, Dave (Misha Collins).
When Amanda finds out from family lawyer Lester Brownlow (late playwright-actor Jason Miller, in his final appearance) that Esther has left her the hotel, she also struggles with the decision to keep or sell it. The arrival of gal pal Candace (Sherri Saum), her b.f. CJ (Andrew Lukich), Grace and Nick -- with nerdy accountant Prescott (Justin Henry) in tow -- precipitates a series of confrontations that reveal the truth about what happened and deliver the closure Amanda so desperately needs. 
Though earnest to a fault, sincerity of husband-and-wife filmmaking team of director Lawrence David Foldes and producer Victoria Paige Meyerink results in emotionally convenient entertainment in place of honest discovery. The script is laden with distinctly American buzzwords -- pic takes just full eight minutes to invoke the word "closure" -- and the story's multiple plot strands and backstories, while admirably ambitious, give proceedings an increasingly rushed feel. Pic's pacing is disrupted by f/x-laden flashbacks to Amanda's trauma, which seem lifted from a horror pic. 
Too much of the acting has the mannered, self-conscious feel of an afternoon sudser. Fletcher has the right nurturing tone for the piece, even as she's trapped in the flashbacks. Bujold floats above it all in yet another perf oozing benevolent wisdom and compassionate tolerance. Miller, star of "The Exorcist," is fine in his few scenes (his death of a heart attack in May 2001 indicates length of pic's post-production). The younger talent fares less successfully, with few of the vets' nuanced, patient characterizations (that's Oscar-nommed "Kramer vs. Kramer" moppet Henry seen briefly as Prescott).
Pic is stunning -- Jeffrey Seckendorf's burnished lensing shows the spectacular Deer Isle location in the best possible light. While plenteous, digital effects seem gratuitous, and Joseph Conlan's score is intrusive and heavy-handed, as befits the story.
Camera (color, widescreen), Jeffrey Seckendorf; editor, Todd Ramsay; music, Joseph Conlan; production designer, Nick Ralbovsky; costume designer, Jane Anderson; sound (Dolby Digital), Mark Berger; visual effects supervisor, Cosmas Paul Bolger Jr. Reviewed at Montreal World Film Festival (Cinema of the Americas -- U.S.A.), Aug. 29, 2003. Running time: 124 MIN.
 With:
Lisa Brenner, Genevieve Bujold, Louise Fletcher, Jeannetta Arnette, Misha Collins, Sherri Saum, Johnny Messner, Justin Henry, Jason Miller, Andrew Lukich.
 

