
Modestly amusing in fits and starts, "Fired!" proves most potent when on-screen interviewees are playing for keeps, not for laughs. Chris Bradley and Kyle Labrache are nominal helmers, but writer-actress Annabelle Gurwitch is unmistakably the true auteur of this pic, a free-wheeling, first-person docu that recalls early efforts of Michael Moore. Limited theatrical runs may be in the cards, but "Fired!" will be employed more profitably as homevid and cable fare. 
Since being sacked from an Off Broadway play by no less a luminary than Woody Allen, Gurwitch (formerly of TBS's "Dinner and a Movie") has enjoyed sweet revenge. After penning a well-received essay about the brutal dismissal -- Allen reportedly told her that her facial expressions suggested mental retardation -- she invited friends and colleagues to describe their own tales of lay-offs and kiss-offs in an Off Broadway monologue series aptly titled "Fired!"
Docu incorporates monologues from that production, along with new interviews and other material Gurwitch also has used for a newly published book.
Throughout pic, Gurwitch questions, narrates and occasionally interacts in a tone pitched somewhere between snarky and sympathetic (leavened with a smidgen of self-pity). Some staged scenes (including a dramatized "re-creation" of Gurwitch's firing by Allen) fall flat, while other bits (especially her ill-starred effort to help Andy Dick operate a lunch wagon) are stubbornly mirthless.
But many of the anecdotes, delivered on stage and off by the likes of Tim Allen, Illeana Douglas and Fred Willard (who recalls being fired from a TV gig after the producers realized they had mistaken him for another actor) are very funny indeed.
Better still, "Fired!" is genuinely affecting when Gurwitch seriously examines the hardships that ensue during the downsizing of GM plants in Lansing, Mich. And there's an almost startling emotional impact to an impassioned rant by economist and sometime character actor Ben Stein, an acknowledged conservative (and former Nixon adviser) who rails against corporate greedheads who manipulate bankruptcy laws to weasel out of pension payments. Stein's unabashed anger is a bracing counterpoint to pic's prevailing tone of cynical bemusement.
Camera (color, DV), Bradley, Labrache. Reviewed at SXSW Film Festival (Spotlight Premiere), Austin, Texas, March 12, 2006. Running time: 85 MIN.
 


Woody Allen  canned actress Annabelle Gurwitch  from his 2003 play, Writer's Block , with a dressing-down so traumatic that it sent her reeling right into the arms of a book contract (Fired! ), a stage play (Fired! ), and now Fired! , a documentary in which the camera-hungry Gurwitch succeeds in assembling the best kind of pity party: one where all the revelers are sharp, funny, and successful enough not to give a shit about their past job woes. (Gurwitch solicits confessions from Sarah Silverman , Andy Dick , and David Cross , but the highlight is Tate Donovan 's puppet show re-enactment of being replaced by Matthew Broderick  in Torch Song Trilogy .) Too bad Gurwitch attempts to extend her neurotic hobbyhorse into a survey of the American job market—including a trip to a GM plant in Lansing, Michigan , that smacks of disingenuous slumming. While "maybe it's for the best" proved happily prophetic for her actor pals, those words of comfort sound more like a clueless bromide when you consider the 30,000 people laid off in Lansing after the film wrapped.
