
The closing credits of "Firehouse Dog" show Polaroids of the cast and crew's own mutts, their names scrawled beneath each picture: Boomer, Daisy, Stinky, and so forth. It's a sweet touch and, really, the first sign of a genuine dog anywhere near the movie.
Supposedly a comedy about a Hollywood canine that finds love and companionship with a big city firehouse and its boy, "Dog" actually features four different stunt Irish terriers tricked up with computer-generated special effects that give them humanoid expressions and allow them to slide down firepoles.
The effect is cute with a capital K and grotesque with a capital G, as though offscreen puppeteers were pulling digital wires to make the animals dance. "Firehouse Dog" isn't quite the equivalent of the 1999 talking-infant bomb "Baby Geniuses ," but at times it's close enough for discomfort.
That's too bad, because the human scenes in "Firehouse Dog" are perfectly acceptable on the level of a heartwarming family B-movie. Josh Hutcherson, that likeably stone-faced kid actor from "Bridge to Terabithia," plays Shane Fahey, whose father Connor (Bruce Greenwood) is the captain of Engine Co. 55, a luckless inner-city outfit known as "Dogpatch." The city wants to shut down the company and a firebug is burning the neighborhood warehouse by warehouse. One firefighter, Connor's brother and Shane's uncle, has been killed.
Into this predicament drops -- literally, from an airplane -- Rexxx, the pampered Hollywood dog star of hits like "Jurassic Bark." After a stunt gone bad lands him in the city without his telltale Elvis pompadour (!), Rexxx adopts himself into Shane's life and proves himself capable of saving lives. He also farts, burps, and poops in the firehouse chef's stew. Remember, it wouldn't be a family movie without the poop jokes.
Hutcherson has enough built-in soul to make Shane's emotional journey from grumpy to cheerful believable, and the adults don't embarrass themselves (with the exception of Dash Mihok as Rexxx's boob of a Tinseltown trainer). The arson mystery is resolved and so are father and son in a way that feels familiar but credible. The firefighting sequences are full of crashing timbers, though; this may be the first movie too scary for kids under 6 and too dumb for anyone older.
And that dog -- or, rather, that digitally enhanced replicant -- is just plain creepy. Yes, your children will laugh when Rexxx puts on the sunglasses and probably applaud when he saves the day, but I'm betting that if they've spent any time around real animals they'll recognize him for the soulless cartoon he is.
What's that you say, Lassie? The family film's in trouble? A cyborg-mutt is pooping in the stew? Go get 'im, girl.


         Movies like "Benji" and "Lassie" with their über-pooches have set a high standard for the heroic dog genre, so the makers of "Firehouse Dog" have taken a slightly different tack: Let the human actors take center stage. It's an odd concept by doggie family film standards, but if anybody is suited to try new tricks with an old genre, it's director Todd Holland, one of the guiding hands behind the hit TV series "Malcolm in the Middle."
 
 Right from the outset, Holland makes clear this is not your typical doggie pic. An over-the-top lead features Rex as a personified pooch and A-list actor complete with an attitude, "fur piece" and diamond-encrusted bling. His pampered life comes to sudden end, however, when he falls out of a plane and lands in the care of brooding preteen Shane Fahey (Josh Hutcherson) and his father (Bruce Greenwood), the captain of the inner-city "Dogpatch" fire station.
 


         






   Shane and Co. soon discover that there's something different about Rex. Not only does he skateboard and beg for a bath, but he also manages the nigh impossible by cleaning Shane's sty of a room. Oh, yes, he saves lives too and in so doing instills much-needed pride in Shane and  the ragtag  fire crew.
 
 "Firehouse Dog" is more than a cute canine caper. What sets up as a furry version of "Doc Hollywood" quickly evolves into a father-son parable as Shane and his father struggle with the impending closure of the run-down station, a possible firebug and the emotional scars left after the recent death of Shane's uncle, the station's former captain.
 
 Rex, of course, helps every step of the way, but despite his physical and mental acumen, he's surprisingly devoid of personality. Picking up the slack is Hutcherson, who was recently seen in "Bridge to Terabithia." This time around, Hutcherson gets his turn to shine while his female counterpart (Hannah Lochner) remains in the background.
 
 Aside from Hutcherson, the film's other strength is its restraint. Holland lets Rex act as his own stunt dog, and the budding romantic relationship between Shane's father and a rival fire captain (Claudette Mink) isn't forced.
 
 The same can be said for the movie as a whole. Though it never completely catches fire, there's enough earnestness and warmth that makes it a welcome alternative in a family film arena dominated by computer animation and associated toy lines.
 
 "Firehouse Dog." MPAA rating: PG for sequences of action peril, some mild crude humor and language. Running time: 1 hour, 51 minutes. In general release.   

The terrier Rexxx might be the least appealing mutt ever to slobber on screen. He's a stuck-up movie-star dog (despite the abundance of X's in his name, he's not that  kind of movie star) who falls out of a plane and becomes a stuck-up rescue dog. Rexxx is cute when he puts on sunglasses. Otherwise, he looks like a cross between a rat and a llama. And he burps, farts, and even poops on dinner. Dog lovers will actually feel sorry for Josh Hutcherson (Bridge to Terabithia ), the kid who's stuck with him.

 In Todd Holland’s “Firehouse Dog” a pampered Hollywood pooch trades his movie-star lifestyle for a run-down firehouse sadly in need of a mascot and some esprit de corps. It’s not long before the resourceful animal is counseling a motherless boy and his neglectful father, saving the firehouse from being closed and tracking down a serial arsonist. Whatever they were paying this mutt, it wasn’t enough.  When a 12-year-old, Shane Fahey (Josh Hutcherson), first encounters the bedraggled Dewey, a k a Rexxx — a stage name suggesting a rather more adult movie career — he’s unimpressed. But Shane is lonely; his father (Bruce Greenwood), a fire captain, is preoccupied with budget cuts and depressed by the recent death of his brother, and it’s easy for Dewey to capture the boy’s heart by defecating in his lunch and passing gas on his bed. Lifelong marriages have been based on less.  As Dewey works to resolve father-son issues and improve Shane’s grades, Mr. Holland and his cadre of writers fill the screen with generic supporting players and some satisfyingly gritty action sequences. Working with four interchangeable Deweys, the filmmakers create a sufficient number of lively stunts to keep the kiddies amused, though the film’s wittiest moment — a canine parody of Dudley Moore’s first glimpse of Bo Derek in “10” — will be appreciated only by their parents. In trying to straddle both age groups, however, “Firehouse Dog” proves decidedly less nimble than its furry star.  “Firehouse Dog” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has flames, flatulence and inoffensive four-letter words.

Boy meets dog, bonds with dad and foils a dangerous arsonist in "Firehouse Dog," a likable but ungainly mutt of a movie in which a very smart canine unexpectedly becomes fireman's best friend. Leaving no heartstrings untugged and no doggie-fart jokes uncracked, scruffy pic reps a very mixed breed of obvious humor, gently moving father-son drama and sub-"Backdraft" trial by fire. Lack of big names and blah title should place the Fox release near the lower end of the family-friendly B.O. spectrum, though this "Dog" will probably have its day on homevid.
The star of such hit films as "The Fast and the Furriest" and "Jurassic Bark," Rexxx is Hollywood's pre-eminent four-legged celebrity, so ridiculously pampered he would've fit right in on Christopher Guest's "Best in Show." But after a dangerous airborne stunt separates Rexxx from his owner, Trey (Dash Mihok), and causes the dog to lose his (hideous) trademark hairpiece, the now ordinary-looking mutt wanders into Dogpatch, an inner-city fire station that's fallen on hard times.
Connor Fahey (Bruce Greenwood, excellent) has reluctantly assumed leadership of the small squad after his brother, Dogpatch's former captain, perished in the line of duty. Stress and grief have strained Connor's relationship with his 12-year-old son Shane (Josh Hutcherson), who gets the unenviable task of taking care of the dog (identified as Dewey by his collar) and finding his owner.
Familiar boy-and-his-dog scenario is enlivened by the fact that Shane initially loathes Dewey, who, far from acting like a normal stray, expects to be treated like the celebrity canine he is. (In a nice comic touch, Shane puts up fliers that read "Found: Ugly stinkin' mutt.") But it's only a matter of time before Dewey -- with his unusual intelligence, acrobatic skills and bravery in the face of danger -- becomes both an excellent rescue dog and a handy PR tool, single-pawedly saving the embattled fire station from closure.
Scenes of gradual father-son reconciliation are very affectingly played by the film's two-legged leads. Between this and the recent "Bridge to Terabithia," Hutcherson is fast becoming the studios' go-to guy for sensitive, neglected tykes, while Greenwood, supplying his usual gravelly understatement, once again proves temperamentally incapable of overacting.
The same can't be said of the other actors, most of whom are saddled with either obvious roles (Bill Nunn as a fireman who's a lousy cook, Mayte Garcia as the squad's attractive lone female) or strained bits of slapstick, and mug their way through accordingly. Additional comedy is supplied by silly flashbacks to Dewey's celebrity life (he once had a tabloid-worthy romance with a dreadlocked Dalmatian), as well as some movie-biz satire as Trey looks for his prized pooch. Overlong at nearly two hours, "Dog" frequently bites off more than it needs to chew.
Veteran TV helmer Todd Holland (whose previous feature was 1998's lamentable "Krippendorf's Tribe") struggles to balance the film's broad, occasionally crass humor against its more serious elements -- namely, the mysterious arsonist who's been setting fires strategically throughout the city. Resolution is predictable but rousing as Connor, Shane and Rexxx/Dewey cement their bond through individual acts of love and courage.
Building-on-fire set pieces are workmanlike but capably handled, and not too scary for tots. Title role is well played by four red-coated Irish terriers (with the Tolkien-inspired names of Arwen, Frodo, Rohan and Stryder), though some of the dog's more athletic feats suggest possible f/x enhancements. 

