
You're forgiven if the title of the new Harrison-Ford-saves-his-family thriller doesn't exactly get your pulse pounding. As used here, "Firewall" is an Internet security term, which is like naming an action movie "Proxy Server!" or "SOCKS Protocol." It promises not car chases but pale IT technicians staring into banks of computers.
Actually, we get both, since Ford plays Jack Stanfield, a Seattle network security exec who has to rob his own bank via computer if he doesn't want the bad guys to kill his wife (Virginia Madsen) and kids (Carly Schroeder and Jimmy Bennett). As directed by Richard Loncraine ("Richard III," "Wimbledon"), the movie's competent stuff, but it also represents professionalism in the service of absolutely nothing. Even Ford knows he's been down this road too often; his performance has a grim intensity and not a shred of spontaneity.
A movie like this needs a suave, amoral villain, so here's Paul Bettany ("Master and Commander") as Bill Cox, a pleasant British fellow who pushes into Jack's suburban house one night along with a mixed quartet of young men carrying automatic weapons. Taking the family hostage, they settle in for the long haul, and Bill accompanies Jack to the bank's downtown offices in the morning for the next stage of his plan.
The hero has been wired for sound and video by the high-tech villains; they have remote access to his office PC; he's essentially a hostage with freedom of movement. This makes for suspenseful comedy for a few scenes as Jack behaves like a possessed executive puppet in front of his boss (Alan Arkin), business rival (Robert Patrick, narrowing his ferrety eyes), and secretary (Mary Lynn Rajskub of "24," once again becoming a cheerfully flaky ally to a Jack in trouble).
At home, meanwhile, the kidnappers are given one personality trait apiece -- there's the thug, the smug, the sweet, and the lunchmeat -- and that's more than Jack's family gets. "Firewall" cannily plays to the fears of modern parenting with a scene involving a peanut-allergy reaction and a missing EpiPen, and it sets the stakes high with a surveillance camera in each room of the house, but the kids are strictly two-dimensional, and as for Madsen, this 
is the thanks she gets for her luminous, Oscar-nominated performance in last year's "Sideways"? As scripted by Joe Forte, the cute/annoying family dog gets to show more personality.
The criminals' plan involves computers and wire transfers and offshore bank accounts, and after a certain point you begin to think that walking into the bank carrying guns and wearing masks would probably have been easier. There are other plot holes (four days indoors and the dog doesn't have to go?) but, dispiritingly, "Firewall" is one of those movies where every detail in the first act is designed to pay off by the third. That remote-control toy car Jack's son plays with has to come back somehow, and it does. There's no air in the movie, nothing left to chance -- it's all been story-conferenced to death.
But you pays your money to see Harrison Ford go medieval on a bunch of punks in the name of enraged American fatherhood and eventually you get just that, even if the one exploding car seems contractually stipulated rather than dramatically necessary. The most interesting bits in "Firewall" come earlier, when Ford shares the screen with Rajskub or a bank manager played by Brenda Crichlow, and his character almost cracks from the mounting strain. At such points you're not sure if Jack is weeping for his family or Ford is weeping for his career.
.


         Just as gardeners keep a fond eye out for the first hardy crocuses of spring, so film people are always eager for the year's first major Hollywood film, the one with the star big enough to plaster on bus stop kiosks all over town. It's a tough job, and Harrison Ford in "Firewall" has it this year.
 
  One of the most deservedly popular of modern leading men, the marquee face of films with a reported $5.5-billion worldwide gross, Ford's last two pictures were 2003's "Hollywood Homicide" and 2002's "K19: The Widowmaker," ventures which did not exactly set anyone on fire. "Firewall" is not likely to do much better.
 


         






    For though it is a reasonable facsimile of a successful thriller, this film (named after a barrier that protects computers from hackers) never manages to be more than mildly effective. While it's set in the hyper-modern world of computer thievery, its plot outline and script are distressingly familiar. What we essentially have here is an old-fashioned, not always convincing B picture with A-list stars.
 
  Those B's were often known for their professionalism, and this film, which costars Paul Bettany and Virginia Madsen, demonstrates that as well. Richard Loncraine, with nearly 40 years of TV and film directing and at least one great film, the Ian McKellen-starring "Richard III," to his credit, is nothing if not a seasoned veteran. But there is only so much that can be done with the film's muddled scenario.
 
  As for the always empathetic Ford, he starts the film looking vaguely weary and ends up increasingly exasperated, irritated and distraught. This is largely due to the multiple perils Joe Forte's script places him in, but it's hard not to wonder if the film itself didn't start to get on his nerves.
 
  Ford plays Jack Stanfield, for 20 years the computer security specialist for Seattle's fictional Landrock Pacific Bank. It's not the best of times for our Jack, even in the early going. His outfit is about to be acquired by massive Accuwest, and he and the big firm's pit bull security chief Gary Mitchell (an effective Robert Patrick) do not see eye to eye.
 
  Fortunately, Jack has the love and support of a truly generic family, predictable down to a pair of bickering kids and a cute dog named Rusty. Madsen does as much as anyone could to humanize wife Beth, an architect and
 a homemaker, but even she and Ford can only accomplish so much with "I don't deserve you"/"No, you don't" style domestic patter.
 
  Served much better by the script is the villainous Bill Cox, smartly played by Bettany (soon to be even badder in "The Da Vinci Code"). A well-mannered psychotic, Bill gets to say snarky things like "Don't imagine for one second I just blundered in out of the rain" (it is Seattle, after all) and be in charge of a criminal gang that takes Jack's wife and family hostage.
 
  Given that Jack is a powerful figure at a bank, it is not a stretch to figure out why his family has been kidnapped, but we still have to sit though stretches of "who are you, what do you want?" dialogue. We also have to watch various desultory attempts by Jack to slip out of Bill's grasp, attempts which we know will be abortive because success would bring the movie to an abrupt close.
 
  After Bill reveals his nefarious scheme, it is up to Jack to execute it or, harsh as it sounds, Bill and company will execute his family. The kind of cat-and-mouse game that now results manages to be diverting at times, but after Jack decides enough is enough and goes all Charles Bronson on everyone, this over-plotted and under-written film loses its already tenuous plausibility. It's always satisfying to see Harrison Ford stand up for all that's decent and right, but it's hard not to wish he didn't wait for a better film to do it in.
 
 "Firewall'
 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some intense sequences of violence   

Computer-security specialist Jack Stanfield (Harrison Ford) looks disgusted much earlier than necessary in Firewall . Here's a guy who's got a smart, beautiful architect wife (Virginia Madsen), two smart, beautiful kids, and a smart, beautiful house in an oceanfront community near his big-cheese office at a Seattle-based bank. Would it kill him to smile? Later in the day, our hero will be called upon to save his family, held hostage by a sophisticated nutjob (Paul Bettany) who wants him to hack into the bank's computers and electronically fork over $100 million. But in the innocent moments of breakfast on a new Pacific Northwest morning (Vancouver stands in for Seattle), could he maybe admit that life is pretty sweet in his elite percentile? That Jack winces with disgust 24/7 in this hopelessly lousy white-collar high-tech thriller, like a man whose great burden is to be surrounded by people never quite as intelligent as he is, suggests two things, neither of them encouraging, about the forgettable Firewall . The first is that the gremlins who cobbled together this exhausted genre pic really never cared who Jack is and why the character has got a bug up his butt as long as the producers secured their product-placement deals (with great fanfare, for instance, an iPod is used to confound the evildoers). The second is that Ford himself, in late middle age, seems bored stiff playing taciturn Harrison Ford-type heroes, with their suits and their gravitas, their honor and their tired old sprees of derring-do, and he jumps through his hoops projecting a lethal combination of wounded feelings and star peevishness.
Either way, it's the audience who loses. There's no need to linger on the widget particulars of this variation on a theme of foiling the bad guys and saving the family (including the sacred family dog, whose GlobalPetFinder collar, trackable by GPS, is used with even greater fanfare to thwart the wicked); if you feel like you've seen it before, it's because you have — action heroes beating the crap out of people in the pious name of protecting their loved ones. The point is, the bad guys, led by Bettany's Bill Cox — a slick, murdering psychopath who, to amuse the actor, employs a binary code of American and English accents — demonstrate how thoroughly they have hacked into the Stanfields' lives. And Jack demonstrates how he can one-up them, calling, in the 11th hour, for the assistance of his indispensable, computer-savvy assistant, Chloe — I mean Janet, played by Mary Lynn Rajskub as a clone of her Chloe self on 24 . This is a man, by the way, who can ''put in an IPS signature that blackholes the pattern'' (or something) in seconds. No wonder Janet worships him — as (all too blindly) does screenwriter Joe Forte, churning out pages of jargon in his first produced film.
On the home front, in the jargon of mothers, Jack's wife, Beth, defends her brood against the menacing goons in her house, and her level of eloquence goes like this: ''Don't you ever touch my children again, do you hear me?'' (Yes, we do, and worry about Madsen being associated with junk so soon after the Oscar-nominated triumph of Sideways .) Meanwhile, with the plot's operating system in default mode, the thing comes to a manufactured climax with a violent hand-to-hand struggle between Jack and Bill — a long, ornately brutal fight that takes unnecessary glee in the punches, left over from thriller days before scenes of computer-file downloading counted as action.
Director Richard Loncraine is a Brit who has handled the dark materials of Dennis Potter's jolting Brimstone & Treacle in the past, but has more recently been associated with the sunshiny love match of Bettany and Kirsten Dunst in Wimbledon . Was he cowed, too, by the sneer on Ford's face? Firewall  is a witless entertainment, and a derivative one, too; it's everything listless about Hollywood in February, everything discardable about the genre in general. But damn it, this piece of ''product'' does promise movie star Harrison Ford, and includes (i.e., squanders) the participation of Robert Patrick (his evil is in his ears), Robert Forster (his evil is in his hair), and Alan Arkin (his eccentricity is in his character's bow tie), all three appearing briefly as bank executives.
Such a product ought to be better. It ought to be tolerable. Did no one say, ''Hey, Harrison, you might as well have some fun''? Or was everyone glumly watching despair breach the security firewall that separates his star persona from the character he plays?


At its core a high-tech, wi-fi version of "The Desperate Hours," "Firewall" begins slowly, exhibits hints of promise in the middle and then descends into silliness. Harrison Ford has the whole "Not with my family, you don't" Everyman routine down to a science, but the improbable twists begin piling up before the star finally goes commando. Beyond Paul Bettany's suave villain, there's not much to distinguish what amounts to an old-fashioned "B" picture, except perhaps its unusually overwrought score. Box office prospects look so-so on a pic that has "rental" written all over it.
Ford has aged gracefully into roles where he's the caring dad, CIA analyst or president who has to save his family, country or plane. Still, this is clearly on the lighter end of that spectrum, both in terms of stakes and believability factor.
As Jack Stanfield, Ford has an idyllic life, with a pretty, accomplished wife (Virginia Madsen) and two squabbling kids (Carly Schroeder, Jimmy Bennett). All that is quickly upended, however, when a team of gunmen invades the house.
The group's leader, Bill Cox (Bettany), has been tracking Stanfield's movements as head of network security for a Seattle bank. Cox plans to take Stanfield's family hostage and compel the patriarch to transfer millions into an offshore account. And while Jack's impulse is to rebel, Cox's elaborate setup includes all kinds of surveillance equipment to monitor his every move.
Thus begins the game of cat and mouse, forcing Jack to behave strangely around his assistant ("24's" Mary Lynn Rajskub), another security expert (Robert Patrick) and colleague Harry (Robert Forster). Yet given Cox's ruthlessness, cooperation can go only so far, leading to an inevitable (if protracted) showdown.
Director Richard Loncraine and writer Joe Forte (marking his first produced screenplay) try to keep the action moving, but they do so at best in fits and starts. Things drag as Cox establishes his scheme, then segue into caper mode as the gunmen figure out how to pull off the robbery, before a last act filled with too-coincidental moments and a few outright laughable ones, including a bit involving the family dog.
Bettany manages to instill his role with a cerebral sense of menace, while Ford essentially draws on a reservoir of good will to bring humanity to Jack as he lurches from one crisis to the next. Madsen, alas, isn't given much to do, other than to make a few thin attempts at coaxing the co-conspirators to set her and the children free.
Despite its preoccupation with technology, "Firewall" really wants to be about heart -- about an average guy rising to the challenge in order to protect his family. While Ford can achieve that posture in his sleep, he's left to do so in a vehicle that the average filmgoer will be more eager to hack out of than into.

Figuring we spend February either catching up with Oscar nominees or never leaving home at all, studios use the season to empty their lots of remaindered bringdowns like so many '94 Jettas . As used cars go, the latest and possibly last Harrison Ford  thriller, Firewall , is no deal: It runs rough, stalls frequently, smells like the stale sweat of four dozen older movies, and handles like a blind mule. Age has everything to do with it: The post–Die Hard  genre is on its last legs, and the movie is as tired in its bones as Ford, who at 63 has crossed the line from robust, no-nonsense manliness to doughy-creepy grumpster. Attempting lighthearted savoir faire is difficult, but desperate action-movie grappling—with his back?—is less than comfortable. Throughout this limping techno-heist rotework, Ford seems irritated to have to work at all at an age when other professionals, with less expensive support teams and alimonies, are eyeing retirement. You feel for him, particularly during the obligatory climactic mano a mano with the sneering, cultured Brit villain (Paul Bettany ), from which he emerges (super-spoiler!) with a stoop and hesitant walk you could mistake for signs of osteoarthritis.
Firewall  is a smaller-scaled pup tent than Ford is used to, but it strives for an impression of size. Slipping on the Richard Donner  dung boots, director Richard Loncraine  constructs this by-the-book experience out of everything loathsome about the last quarter-century of Hollywood  blockbusters: three-line scenes of character exposition, action sequences shot with the DP rocking the camera on his shoulder, digital smudge–slo-mo, overwritten plot holes, fake hacker chat, whiny kids, helpless wives, faithful dogs. Joe Forte 's debut script sets up Ford as a Seattle bank's testy wizard of security, and then invades his sumptuous cliffside home with a team of studly gun-toting hoods, led by Bettany's serpentine mastermind. With his family held hostage, Ford's helpless exec must provide the baddies with access to the bank's mainframe, a scheme that doesn't work for simple logistical reasons, after which our hero is forced to muster a new way, overnight, to infiltrate his own system (MacGyvering an iPod !) and transfer nine figures to offshore accounts.
Ford's career was built upon his stature as besieged über-Dad, and in a way Firewall 's scenario is unusually humiliating: He can't even get these punks out of his own house, or stop them from giving the wrong cookies to his nut-allergic son. But search for patriarchy-under-fire subtext in vain; the story comes virtually sex- and violence-free, and Ford's family man is cartoon immaculate. Soon, the Desperate Hours  template switches to a Wrong Man  run-through, and ends up (never kidding) at the crooks' hideout shack on the sea, where stacked planks wiggle and snap like licorice should you happen to be thrown through them. Even the most blindly resolute of genre devotees will decry the rerun laziness on view when the plot pivots in the last act on a heretofore unmentioned GPS sensor hidden in the family pooch's collar.
As for Ford, autumn is upon him. We can hope this episode will serve him as a sign that the saggy, dentured gray-power phase of his stardom is not best spent redoing old moneymakers in a girdle à la John Wayne , but rather, like Paul Newman , daring to be proud of his enlarged colon and the hair in his ears.
