 A pointed little thriller with metaphysical pretensions, “First Snow” is shrewd enough to approach basic philosophical questions in sneaky, offhand ways. Are our individual fates sealed, or can we alter them by changing our behavior? In trying to shape our destinies, are we just bringing them on? Is knowing the future a blessing because it allows us to plan ahead and make amends, or a curse that can’t be shaken?  “First Snow,” the directorial debut of Mark Fergus, filters such questions through the unlikable character of Jimmy Starks (Guy Pearce), a shifty, sharp-shooting flooring salesman based near Albuquerque whose desperate edge recalls Mr. Pearce’s memory-challenged character in “Memento.” In his latest scheme to hit the jackpot, he is raising money to buy up a cache of vintage Wurlitzer jukeboxes and sell them to bars around the country.  Putting the kind of  fast-talking salesman who would be at home in a David Mamet play through the existential wringer suggests that “First Snow” is an examination of the all-American karma of greed and the self-made man, but it’s only partly that. A noirish thriller that revels in ominous visual moods, deepened by Cliff Martinez’s spare, shivering guitar score, this heartland “Appointment in Samarra” is a mind-teaser that speaks the flat, evasive language of its seedy characters. Mr. Fergus and his screenwriting collaborator Hawk Ostby belonged to the writing team on “Children of Men.” They may not have Mr. Mamet’s acute ear, but their dialogue captures the vacant cheery tone of salesmen on the make.  Gaunt, rat-eyed and sweaty, with greasy, shoulder-length hair, Jimmy lives with his girlfriend, Deirdre (Piper Perabo), in desert high country dotted with ugly fake-adobe houses. At the beginning of the movie, he fires his protégé, Andy (Rick Gonzalez), for skimming money off the top, even though it was something Jimmy had taught him how to do. Jimmy also balks at moving to Taos with Deirdre (an underwritten role) to live a more settled existence.  One afternoon while waiting at a depot for his car to be repaired, Jimmy notices a trailer with a sign offering $10 fortunetelling and decides to plunk down the cash. When he asks  Vacaro (J. K. Simmons), the grizzled, hangdog-eyed seer, to predict the outcome of a basketball game, he is assured that the New Mexico Wolves will win —  unlikely, since the team’s star player has been injured. Vacaro also tells him that a windfall will arrive by way of Dallas, but Jimmy knows no one there.  Suddenly Vacaro goes into a seizure. When he recovers,  he insists that Jimmy take back his money. Jimmy dismisses the incident until the Wolves pull off a surprise victory, and he learns of unexpected backing for the jukebox enterprise from a source in Dallas.  Shaken, Jimmy returns to the trailer, points a gun at Vacaro’s head and demands to know the vision that produced the seizure.  After a pause, Vacaro says wearily: “I saw no more roads, no more tomorrows. But you’re safe until the first snow.”  Jimmy begins to come apart. Winter is approaching, and the radio warns of a blizzard. The landscape is charged with a sullen foreboding. Threatening drawings arrive in the mail, along with eerie, static-filled  phone messages that suggest that Jimmy is being stalked.  He decides that Andy is out to get him. Or could it be Vince, his best childhood buddy, who was recently discharged from prison after serving three years for a money-laundering scheme concocted by the two of them? Jimmy had betrayed his friend to avoid going to prison.  As Jimmy, besieged by paranoia and guilt, desperately pursues answers, you half expect the movie to take a turn into horror, but it remains on its circular track inside his tormented mind. When it turns a little soft, you wonder if it will tumble into mawkish “Touched by an Angel” territory, but it remains dry-eyed.  The story slowly builds to a pained reunion of Jimmy and Vince, whose life is now in shambles.  Finally, when the first real snow begins to fall, it’s almost a relief. For better or for worse, this is it.  “First Snow” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations, strong language and violence.

A moody psychological thriller about a salesman's paranoid attempts to circumvent his predicted demise, "First Snow" engages but underwhelms. Writing duo Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby ("Children of Men," with tyro Fergus at the directorial helm) have crafted a nuanced character study whose well-chosen elements -- the flat, existential New Mexico landscapes, inventively detailed interiors, strong supporting players and a credible central perf by Guy Pearce -- never completely gel. But the good-looking pic, opening a week after "Premonition," may score as a worthy masculine-noir alternative to overwrought femme melodrama. 
Pitchman par excellence, Jimmy (Pearce) has an eye for the main chance and an angle for every occasion. Peddling vintage Wurlitzer jukeboxes by day, carousing with co-worker pal Ed (William Fichter) by night and snuggling with live-in g.f. Dierdre (Piper Perabo) in between, Jimmy cynically dismisses mankind as potential marks or fellow con men.
A car repair strands Jimmy in the boondocks where, in a battered trailer, an old man (a hauntingly wise turn by J.K. Simmons) foresees his impending death sometime after the first snow -- a forecast Jimmy initially dismisses, but one that gradually takes on an ominous credibility. Echoes of the time-jiggered Pearce starrer "Memento" reverberate here, as the terrifying future begins to color the present and unleash the past.
Anxiety and self-doubt unravel Jimmy's narcissistic certitude, as a personality built on denial slowly crumbles. An anonymous threat evokes vengeful specters of people Jimmy has previously screwed over on his rise to the middle, chief among them a hotheaded protege (Rick Gonzales) and childhood friend and ex-partner Vincent (Shea Whigham), whom Jimmy cravenly sold out to the cops.
Amid abstract discussions of fate and free will, Jimmy sinks into feral paranoia, followed by calm acceptance and last-minute stabs at restitution.
Jimmy's attempts to aggressively forestall his fate ironically rouse the sleeping dragons he sought to appease. Vincent, recently released from prison and angered by Jimmy's continued denial of responsibility, grows increasingly unstable, building to one of the pic's edgiest moments. Yet it's impossible to gauge the level of irony implicit in Jimmy's quick-fix salvation,as helmer Fergus fudges the distance between Jimmy's p.o.v. and the film's.
Pearce physically makes the part his own, his long-haired, lean-and-hungry look a welcome variation on the Alpha-salesman stereotype. Yet, though he appears in every scene, he cannot fully pull off the pic's moral arc: Pearce's dour thesping lacks sufficient variety, his fast-talking con man only a nervous shift away from his cornered-wreck persona. In the absence of strong direction, the camera, like a teacher waiting for a recalcitrant student to produce the right answer, passively follows Pearce's erratic peregrinations until he arrives at his destiny.
Action scenes, on the other hand, play out with a nice, nervous energy. Eric Edward's widescreen lensing turns the landscape into a personage in itself, as changing temperatures presage doom.
Pic is subtly strewn with unobtrusive signs and symbols (Native American artifacts or the illustrated writings on the wall in Vincent's room) that are never explained, suggesting unplumbed depths and back stories. Devorah Herbert's expressively detailed production design, contrasting Jimmy's impersonally spacious abode with Vincent's cramped, cluttered lair, intricately mirrors the characters' mind-states.

Destiny is as loophole-free as an IRS  audit in this appointment-in-Samarra  yarn from Children of Men  screenwriters Mark Fergus  and Hawk Ostby , in which cocky salesman Jimmy Starks  (Guy Pearce ) risks the love of his doting girlfriend (Piper Perabo ), not to mention his life and sanity, to avoid a fortune-teller's ominous reading. The presence of Memento 's Pearce, the poster boy for narrative dislocation, would seem to herald yet another gimmicky puzzle movie about the interconnectedness of every speck of dust and the hair-trigger whims of the space-time continuum. But first-time director Fergus's film is more a moody, tedious anti-thriller about ineluctable fate. And speaking of fate, is it written somewhere that every indie quasi-noir must include a dripping faucet, ceiling fans, shadows of slatted blinds, and a traveling shot of highway lines? As surely as Fergus's establishing shot of the desert must begin with a tumbleweed.
