 Propelled by an eccentric cast of characters and increasingly seamy locations, “Fix” dashes headlong through Los Angeles with a little charm and a lot of verve.  Unfolding over a single, frantic day, the plot follows the efforts of two filmmakers, Milo (played by the director, Tao Ruspoli) and Bella (Olivia Wilde), to deliver Milo’s junkie brother, Leo (Shawn Andrews), to rehab. The cost is $5,000 — which none of the three have access to — and the deadline is 8 p.m., after which Leo goes to jail. Ladies and gentlemen, start your engines.  Inspired by actual events in the director’s life, “Fix” plays out in a rough-and-tumble, first-person filming style that challenges the eye and the stomach. The movie, however, never strains for hipness, and Mr. Ruspoli displays an aptitude for the play of light and shade that transforms familiar setups into something fresh. Entering a strange netherworld where a Ukrainian cat-toy maker grows weed in the back room and an English bulldog has significant street value, Milo and Bella become unwilling accomplices to Leo’s moneymaking schemes and hostages to his fearless narcissism. Naturally, they begin to enjoy themselves.  By turns vivid and grubby, sharp and distracted, “Fix” aligns its mood with the view (the ruins of the South Central Farm are noted with a moment of rueful silence) to deliver a love letter to Los Angeles as well as an ode to fraternal obligation.

Fraternal duty turns into a wild ride through nearly all Greater Los Angeles in Tao Ruspoli's breezy, brash narrative feature debut "Fix." Urban road-trip pic risks being yet another tiresome exercise in full-length, hand-held first-person-camera. But the diversity of visual tactics, characters, settings and incidents keep this shaggy-dog tale consistently diverting. Theatrical prospects are a longshot, but fests gigs and niche DVD should be easy to come by.
Filmmaking partners of indeterminate romantic status Milo (Ruspoli, seldom on-camera) and Bella (Olivia Wilde) fly down from S.F. to ensure Milo's junkie sibling Leo (Shawn Andrews) makes it to rehab by evening, otherwise he'll get a mandatory prison stint. Bella is unenthused and unamused when Leo turns up shoeless in pajamas, an obviously unrepentant scam artist and hedonist. Since he needs to raise several thou to fund rehab, he leads the couple on a mazelike series of schemes and errands from the Hollywood Hills to Venice to Watts, picking up sometime g.f. Carmen (Megalyn Echikunwoke) and a pound of medical-grade marijuana en route. Music supervisor Bryan Ling's cool mix-tape soundtrack, mixed pro/amateur perfs, energetic pace and non-copout ending keep "Fix" fresh.
Camera (color, Sony HDcam), Christopher Gallo, Ruspoli; editor, Paul Forte; music supervisor, Bryan Ling; production designers, Sarah Osbourne, Erin Eagleton. Reviewed at Slamdance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 21, 2008. Running time: 90 MIN.
 

