 A business course on cutthroat capitalism disguised as a slacker comedy: That’s the kindest way to describe  Michael Lehmann’s “Flakes,” a movie that shares the smug, hipper-than-thou sensibility of its sour protagonist, Neal Downs (Aaron Stanford).  An aspiring rock musician who manages a New Orleans eatery where the only bill of fare is breakfast cereal, Neal is a reflexively sarcastic deadbeat whose equally sour girlfriend, Pussy Katz (Zooey Deschanel), shares his bohemian dream of traveling the country in an Airstream trailer, making music and art.  The walls of the restaurant, called Flakes, are lined with cereal boxes, including rare discontinued brands. As customers slop up exotic combinations,  the movie suggests a deadpan spoof of gourmet fetishism. One house specialty  —  chocolate-flavored grains steeped in chocolate milk  —  sounds particularly nauseating.  Owned by Willie (Christopher Lloyd), a decrepit hippie geezer with mad-scientist hair, Flakes limps along as a hangout for deadbeats until a bright-eyed yuppie visitor, Stuart (Keir O’Donnell), proposes turning it into a lucrative franchise. When Willie and Neal express no interest, Stuart establishes a rival Flakes across the street, and the New Orleans cereal wars begin.  Hoping to put Stuart out of business, Neal begins playing dirty tricks, the nastiest of which is the distribution of fliers to the homeless promising 10 free bowls per customer at his rival’s establishment. The prank sets off a near-riot that Stuart skillfully turns to his advantage.  Neal’s new live-in relationship with Pussy begins to curdle when she turns traitor and goes to work for the competition, hoping that the demise of the original Flakes will leave Neal with time to finish his CD. If the name of his band, Cereal Killers, is perfectly chosen, its music is a joke.  Once lawyers become involved in the dispute, the movie’s anti-establishment attitude evaporates, as does the teeny bit of levity “Flakes” has generated.
Flakes, the eponymous star of the movie Flakes , is actually an aggressively cool New Orleans cereal café. Yup, that's right . . . it sells breakfast cereal and only breakfast cereal to a group of cereal-obsessed hipsters. Neal (Aaron Stanford ) manages the place and plays in a rock band on the side. His girlfriend, Miss Pussy Katz  (Zooey Deschanel ), wants him to get out of the cereal business for good and devote himself to his art. So when a mean old capitalist opens a rival café across the street, Pussy joins up with him to help put Flakes out of business and get her man back with his band. If this all sounds impossibly flimsy, that's because it is. Despite a few good one-liners, the dialogue is overwritten, and director Michael Lehmann  (Heathers , The Truth About Cats & Dogs ) is in thrall with the hipness he tries to chronicle. There's something eerily prelapsarian about the whole production: The Cereal Wars seem to be taking place not only before Katrina , but before the Internet age, in a world where flannel shirts are still the pinnacle of cool. It's a wonder we don't hear anyone ask, "What's your damage?"
