 Set in Hong Kong just before the city’s return to Chinese rule, “Flash Point” plays like the last hurrah of a criminal underclass facing the inevitable shrinking of its bottom line.  Yet the director, Wilson Yip, having located his film at this volatile political crossroads, proceeds to ignore its possibilities. Instead he confines himself to cheering the unorthodox policing methods of his hero, Ma Jun (Donnie Yen). Flippantly dismissing departmental concerns about his use of excessive force, Ma doggedly pursues his lowlife targets like a souped-up Dirty Harry. When his undercover partner (Louis Koo) is exposed and almost killed, justification for Ma’s brutality is no longer required.  A sequel of sorts to Mr. Yip’s film “S.P.L.” (released in the United States as “Kill Zone”), “Flash Point” attaches coldly professional visuals to a narrative so baffling that it’s rarely clear who is pounding on whom or why. Kidnappings, car chases and extended fight scenes — including the shockingly violent murder of a child — are executed with eye-popping proficiency, but the fluid action choreography (directed by Mr. Yen) never surmounts the superficiality of the script. Undercurrents of racial tension between the Chinese cops and their Vietnamese prey remain unexplored, and women are used strictly to remind us that killers are human too. Even Dirty Harry had a mom.

A pall hangs over "Flash Point," the new cops-vs.-Triad entry from busy H.K. action specialists Wilson Yip and Donnie Yen, and it's only partly due to the long waits between displays of Yen's new interest in mixed martial arts. A plot defeated by creative exhaustion is matched with an attitude endorsing the sorts of tactics that suit a police state. Plainly disappointing as a well-sustained kick-butt thriller, and politically toxic, the pic opened in early August to strong Mainland B.O. and upward thumbs, and looks to perform along the lines of the duo's last hit, "SPL."
Detective Ma (Yen) begins and ends the saga, set in 1996 prior to the H.K. turnover to China, by stating (in voiceover) the simple credo, "My duty as a cop is to catch thieves." "Catching," though, hardly describes what Ma actually does. His undercover partner Wilson (Louis Koo) may have successfully worked his way inside the rising Triad gang led by Tony (Collin Chou), but given Ma's reckless approach -- he's the kind of guy who opts for running kicks to the groin over talking things through -- Wilson's cover is bound to be exposed.
Paradoxically, despite Ma's rule-breaking style and Yen's obvious gifts for waging and staging mixed martial arts (which fuses Western boxing, Muay Thai kicking and a Brazilian brand of Jujitsu called Capoeira), the filmmakers and screenwriter Szeto Kam-Yuen don't create enough set pieces and action blocks early enough to grab the viewer. There's barely enough onscreen in the first two acts to indicate that Yen's cop-hero has the right chop-socky stuff, which is sure to make genre auds itchy.
"Flash Point" is remarkably routine for being one of the first films to consciously promote Bruce Lee's long-held ideal of a fusion of every popular martial arts style, and offers no reason to be the slightest concerned when Wilson nearly dies, or Ma appears outgunned and outmanned, or when Tony's crew seems poised for Triad supremacy. A strained kidnap subplot finally unleashes the brand of action -- between Ma and Tony in brutal combat, at the 76-minute mark in the 87-minute-long pic -- that fans would be demanding all along.
There's nothing here offering the pleasures of "SPL's" faceoffs involving vet superstar Sammo Hung, but Yen's intensely physical approach to mixed martial arts is so visceral it will distract some from the pic's message that any method deployed by cops, no matter how illegal, is justifiable.
Camera (color, widescreen), Cheung Man-po; editor, Cheung Ka-fai; music, Chan Kwon-wing; production designer, Kenneth Mak; costume designer, Lee Pik-kwan; sound (Dolby Digital), Sam Wong; visual effects, Menfond Electronic Art & Computer Design Co.; action choreographers, Kenji Tanigaki, Yan Hua. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Midnight Madness), Sept. 13, 2007. Running time: 87 MIN.
 



Cops catch felons: That's what passes for philosophy with Donnie Yen 's police sergeant in the inane Flash Point , a gangland thriller that's set on the eve of Hong Kong's hand-over to China but doesn't go further than alluding to the seriousness of the contentious political atmosphere. Such phony gravitas is disappointing, because the film is almost fun when it plays dumb: Not since Bangkok  Dangerous  has such exciting use been made of electronic music, and Wilson Yip's colorful comic-book frames accommodate some sick action sequences and giddy non sequiturs. The ability of the film's characters to inflict and sustain superhuman pain may not be typical of cops or Triad gangsters, but there's a crazed elegance to all the flying limbs and the ease with which objects as big as tables are wielded as weapons. A thug with a ginormous blade lunges out of nowhere to slice a cop's extended arm, a bomb is hidden inside the cavity of a fat-ass chicken, and a child is cruelly but comically flipped upside down and used as protective leverage. Too bad, then, that Flash Point  treats its audience like dogs, making us suffer through routine, almost inscrutable plot points and inconsequential characterizations to get to these episodes, and as such reveals itself as nothing more than a dumb action picture with delusions of Johnnie To –dom.
