
Of the many breathtaking sights in ``Flicka" (rolling plains, mountain views, Wyoming sky that stretches on and on and on), the most impressive happens to be Alison Lohman's hair. Whether she's astride a galloping horse or tumbling down a hill, her copper locks seem so divinely equine that the actual horses, with their lifeless manes, terrible bangs, and split ends, must surely be jealous. This hair is alive
. Fortunately, so is the rest of this lovably corny adaptation of Mary O'Hara's grade-school classic, ``My Friend Flicka. "
O'Hara's book and the 1943 weepie it became were about a wayward boy (Roddy McDowell in the '43 version) given a young filly as a lesson to teach him responsibility. This progressive update has a spine. Lohman plays Katy McLaughlin, a 16-year-old who has to repeat a year of school because she can't stop thinking about horses or her family's ranch. Her first night home for summer vacation, she slips out of her bedroom, races into the stable, and asks its braying residents, ``Who wants to go ridin
'?" It's more of an exclamation the way Lohman says it. And you certainly share her excitement after she does.
On that ride, Katy discovers a wild oil-black mustang. Instantly in love, she names it Flicka (Swedish, apparently, for ``beautiful girl"), and begs her daddy not to sell it.
Dad, played by an affecting Tim McGraw in a sad hairpiece, sells it anyway and modest familial angst ensues. That scene of the sale is the only bad moment in Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner's screenplay. Flicka has to go, but not before Katy's strapping older brother (Ryan Kwanten ) announces that he hates daddy, and he hates the stupid ranch, and he's going East -- to BU. Dad yells back. Katy cries for the horse. And mom (Maria Bello) urges them all to chill.
But by this point, the film, which Michael Mayer directed, has taken care to convincingly demonstrate that the McLaughlins are a loving family. In one romantic scene, on horseback, mom and dad are even shown discussing how to resolve this hiccup in their harmony. You can feel the love all over this movie. In fact, there might be too much. Several scenes were required for me to believe that Lohman and Kwanten weren't more than siblings. Not all his glances seem brotherly -- yet there's nothing creepy or untoward about him, either. It's love
, man.
The best parts of ``Flicka" are its pinch-me optimism and its old-fashioned-movie flourishes. Eventually, Katy goes after the horse with hazardous abandon. And her reckless courage affords us some cliffhanger-style swipe editing and the sight of a feverish Lohman doing some terrific thrashing in her bed. ``Flickaaaa
," she moans.


Horse love and daddy love are the purest loves of all, and Flicka , a new yet insistently old-fashioned spin on the kid-lit classic My Friend Flicka , traffics in both. But bighearted and beautifully shot as it is, this latest film version (the original starred Roddy McDowall, the Alison Lohman of 1943, as the misfit trainer of a ''loco'' horse) can't buck its public-library mustiness, despite a blaring pop/country soundtrack. As for our heroine (Lohman), her archetypal struggle with crusty Pa (uncrusty Tim McGraw) feels attitude-heavy and life-lesson-light.

 Girl meets horse yet again in “Flicka,” an entertainingly ridiculous update of Mary O’Hara’s 1941 children’s novel, “My Friend Flicka.” Alison Lohman stars as Katy McLaughlin (a boy named Ken in the original story), a boarding-school student on the verge of flunking out because her head is in the clouds, where she has apparently been huffing pure oxygen since last semester.  That, at least, might explain why this pouty miss with an unruly mane and a thing for horses spends much of her summer break flouncing around the male help with jail-bait insouciance, sassing her parents (the country-music star Tim McGraw and a wide-smiling Maria Bello) and almost killing the object of her sublimated desire.  Set on a horse ranch in a spectacularly pristine, mountainous swath of Wyoming, far from the madding crowd and any vestige of polluting contemporary life, “Flicka” looks as fetchingly unreal as a presidential campaign commercial designed by Martha Stewart. Ms. Bello’s ripely amusing performance, with its blend of no-fuss professionalism and twinkling-eye intensity, adds to the strikingly thin air of unreality, whether her character (whom Mr. McGraw risibly calls Mama) has rustled up wild gooseberry pancakes with crème fraîche for breakfast or is gardening in the afternoon sun with a flashing grin and an impeccably coiffed fall of hair (no ponytail) worthy of a Wisteria Lane hausfrau. She’s not desperate, but she very well may be stoned.  Ms. Bello is welcome company, particularly because her presence among all the cowboy hats and manure summons memories of David Cronenberg’s “History of Violence,” an equally otherworldly if considerably superior and knowing fiction about the clash between old-fashioned values and modern-day pragmatism. Here, Katy wants to live free or at least break the beautiful black mustang she happens on while out riding. For his part, her father, a man of few words, simple thoughts and no discernible personality, wants Katy to go back to daydreaming in school, not yet realizing that her hunky brother, Howard (Ryan Kwanten), who likes to lounge around with a bare chest and perfectly fitted cutoff jeans, would sooner become an Abercrombie & Fitch model than take over the ranch.  What’s a family to do? Not a whole lot, as it happens. Directed by Michael Mayer and written by Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner, “Flicka” is padded with minor incident and a wealth of beauty shots that inspire intense vacation-home envy, but the parts never cohere dramatically. Mr. Mayer dutifully draws lines between Katy’s efforts to tame her wild horse and her father’s more cumbersome attempts to corral her, but he can’t spin this metaphoric hay into gold. What he does do very nicely, however, aided and abetted by an expression of unfettered ecstasy on Ms. Lohman’s face that gives her the aspect of St. Teresa of Avila, is confirm that nothing should ever come between a girl and her horse, especially a saddle.  “Flicka” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has some very mild language.

Updated and overhauled from its 65-year-old source novel to speak to the contemporary American West, "Flicka" is a wonderful film in search of an appropriately sized audience. To call this the best horse-and-kid picture since "The Black Stallion" a quarter century ago is true but misleading; it's not really either an animal or a kids' film but rather a young adult drama that rings emotionally true, with nary a manufactured note struck. But without a concerted marketing push -- or even so much as pre-Sunday newspaper ads -- to suggest there's something special here, this sharply observed and acted story could be perceived as an old-hat family entry, with underachieving theatrical results a likely self-fulfilling prophecy.
As Mary O'Hara's time-tested tale of hard-won maturity has been reconceived for a female lead, and cast with exceptional care by a leading theater director, it is apparent from the outset the filmmakers were aiming at something more than a run-of-the-mill remake. What emerges is this year's acutely sensitive study of emotional turmoil set against the majestic backdrop of a Wyoming ranch.
The central character is now Katy McLaughlin (Alison Lohman), a boarding school student who heads home to her family's Wyoming ranch home after having daydreamed her way through her final exam. Pretty and stubborn and clearly unresolved about many things, Katy is scarcely the privileged rich girl she at first appears to be; the family may have inherited some beautiful land, but Katy's tradition-minded father Rob (Tim McGraw) struggles to make a go of it breeding quarter horses, with the resilient support of his clear-headed wife Nell (Maria Bello), and isn't sure what he can expect from Katy or her brawny older brother Howard (Ryan Kwanten).
The transformation taking place throughout the West, in demographics and character, charges the film with a vibrant, and very accurate, undercurrent. In the inflexible, often unrealistic way Rob sticks to time-worn attitudes, this middle-aged cowboy expresses the anxieties of a man who doesn't want to imagine not passing on his way of life to his kids, but who knows he could cash in by selling his land for subdivision to out-of-state rich folks -- it's happening all around him.
Katy's behavior exacerbates everything. Not only does it look as though she'll have to repeat her year at school, but she becomes taken with a wild black mustang she puts in a small corral and begins trying to tame, expressly against her father's orders. To him, the steed is dangerous, untrainable, worthless. To Katy, Flicka is a reflection of herself, a pure manifestation of the freedom she seeks but which must be harnessed, focused, disciplined.
Conflicts mount steadily in Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner's economical, cleanly articulated screenplay, which isn't afraid of high school-level symbolism and metaphors when they happen to be apt and mutually enriching to character and theme. Fed up with his daughter's obstinacy, Rob sells Flicka (Swedish for "pretty girl") to become a rodeo horse. Just as Rob feels pushed to the brink of deciding to sell the ranch, Nell, a smart cookie with likely Eastern roots, makes him see the obvious -- that Katy is just like him.
This realization doesn't mean father and daughter don't continue to butt heads, however, especially when Katy, with Howard's connivance, dresses like a boy (one with a remarkable resemblance to Johnny Depp) in order to ride Flicka in the summer rodeo's mustang race to win the money to buy him back. Bracingly, this does not go at all according to plan, or to Hollywood convention these days, but instead leads to near-tragedy and honestly earned emotion, as family members come to see one another for who they are.
Director Michael Mayer, following his uneven but creditable indie feature debut, "A Home at the End of the World," here fluently negotiates the dramatic fluctuations. His film technique isn't yet entirely smooth, but he is greatly aided by lenser J. Michael Muro, who debuted as a d.p. on Kevin Costner's similarly rich and emotive oater "Open Range" and here serves up a darkly textured widescreen tapestry. Cutting is drum tight, and composer Aaron Zigman largely avoids the typical wall-to-wall musical slatherings of most contempo heart-tuggers.
"Flicka" could so easily have gone wrong, in one direction, by being cutesy and manipulative, or in another by indulging in rote dysfunctional family posturing. Mayer steers clear of these shoals thanks to good dramatic instincts and perfectly chosen actors. Lohman, 25 when the film was shot, still passes convincingly as a high schooler and doesn't sacrifice an ounce of Katy's intensity by shrewdly underplaying in an ideal performance. Country-Western star McGraw, having passed muster in his bigscreen debut in "Friday Night Lights," looks like the genuine article as a rancher, and carries off his serious scenes with aplomb. Bello turns what could have been a bland, stand-around-supportively wife into a vibrant woman committed to her husband and creative enough to help him change; the subject is never broached, but McGraw and Bello strongly convey the impression of a still frisky and lusty relationship between long-marrieds.
For the record, O'Hara's 1941 novel "My Friend Flicka" was first put onscreen in 1943 in a popular Fox release starring Roddy McDowall. O'Hara wrote two sequels, "Thunderhead, Son of Flicka," in 1943, and "Green Grass of Wyoming," in 1946, each of which was filmed two years after publication. The well-remembered TV series ran for 39 episodes in 1955-56.
