The great Taiwanese filmmaker Hou Hsiao-hsien expands on the bright, drifty loveliness of Albert Lamorisse's 1956 classic, The Red Balloon , in Flight of the Red Balloon , his lyrical French-language debut, floating notions about loneliness and urban beauty, frazzled adults and buffeted kids. Her hair a telling botch of bleach, Juliette Binoche   is outstanding as a wildly untogether single mother who parks her son with a French-speaking Chinese nanny while she whirls and worries. Hou, meanwhile, observes the mess in with a kind, gentle eye in much the same way as the red balloon hovers, patient.

 If the luscious red orb that sails through “Flight of the Red Balloon” like an airborne cherry looks as if it flew in from another movie, in some ways it did. The film, the latest wonderment from the Taiwanese master Hou Hsiao-hsien, takes as one of its inspirations Albert Lamorisse’s 1956 classic, “The Red Balloon,” about a young boy and the talismanic sphere that follows him through the gray streets of Paris like a dog, a lover, a ghost — as much a reminder of the precariousness of life as an emblem of innocence.  There is a young boy in this red balloon film too, Simon (Simon Iteanu), a moppet with sandy hair and serious eyes who lives with his mother, Suzanne (Juliette Binoche), in a tiny bourgeois-bohemian Parisian flat bursting with books and bric-a-brac. When the story opens, Simon is trying to coax the balloon into his grasp, his body straining upward as he clambers on the railing of a Métro stop at the Place de la Bastille, the site of the uprising that helped ignite the Revolution of 1789. Despite Simon’s pleading, the balloon floats away and sails past the quarter’s totemic July Column, a pillar that commemorates the Revolution of 1830 and is crowned with a golden winged male figure called the Spirit of Liberty.  The balloon will soon hover closer to the ground, as will the film, which centers on a handful of characters joined together in love and no small amount of confusion, much of it churned up by Suzanne. One of the most vibrantly alive and true characters in Ms. Binoche’s career, a résumé inundated with melodramatic tears, Suzanne invades the film like a hurricane, a riot of colors, textures, patterns and words. She’s terminally distracted and buzzing with fury (at her estranged lover, at her neighbor), one of those bruised souls for whom every slight contains the threat of a larger drama. A professional puppeteer, she seems most at peace only when she’s giving grave, gravelly voice to one of her creations.  The story takes off shortly after the balloon does, when Simon is tethered to another elusive wanderer, Song (Song Fang), a Chinese national hired to be his sitter.  A former film student, Song turns out to be making a video about red balloons, which suggests that Mr. Lamorisse’s 1956 movie is beloved not only by Western children. (At one point you see snippets of her video — Simon puts in a guest appearance — which makes it seem as if Song had been scouting locations for the very film you’re watching.) Like the puppet show Suzanne performs, about a character who tries to boil the ocean to retrieve his beloved, the video speaks to something about the interior life of the character, giving shape to feeling.  The puppet play and the video are in a sense shadows of Mr. Hou’s film, which itself has a diaphanous, hypnotically ethereal quality. Part of this is due to Mr. Hou’s approach to narrative, which replaces the rigid linearity of the three-act model with complex, impressionistic forms; isolated gestures; fugitive moments;  saturated moods; and visual harmony.  Yet while his stories may feel loose, elliptical (earlier titles include his 1998 masterpiece, “Flowers of Shanghai”), he is extraordinarily rigorous. In “Flight of the Red Balloon” he makes particularly expressive use of glass, as when Simon stares out a window and his gaze is met by his own reflection, a doubling that echoes the scene before, when the red balloon pauses next to its painted twinned image floating on a mural.  Melancholy clings to Simon, Suzanne and Song as it does to many of Mr. Hou’s characters. Much like the red balloon, which bops into periodic view and hovers outside the apartment window like a prowler (or an angel), mother and child appear especially adrift. They’re both in the world and yet somehow apart, as if lost in a mutual dream.  This otherworldly sense is amplified by two flashbacks — one motivated by Simon, the other by Suzanne — involving the family’s other child, Louise (Louise Margolin), a teenager who lives in Brussels, where she cares for her maternal grandfather, a puppeteer like Suzanne. Seen only in flashback and in images from childhood, Louise is the resident ghost, a reminder of the time when the family was together.  That may sound heavy, yet there’s a lightness of touch here that keeps the worst at bay. Mr. Hou’s films can be crushingly sad; as with Bresson and Ozu, his restraint only deepens the emotional power of his work. But whether because of that red balloon — which alternately invokes the spirit of liberty and its elusiveness — or because he was practicing his art in one of the world’s most beautiful cities, Mr. Hou has made a film that is, to borrow a line from one of his characters, “a bit happy and a bit sad.” These words are spoken by a student who, with Simon and a cluster of others, is in the Musée d’Orsay with a teacher discussing Félix Vallotton’s 1899 painting of a child chasing a red ball, “Le Ballon.”  Vallotton was associated with a group of Post-Impressionist artists, including Maurice Denis, who took their inspiration from Gauguin and called themselves the Nabis.  The Nabis created vividly colored, abstracted images of everyday life that I think Mr. Hou must find appealing.  Embracing his status as a prophet of the modern, Denis wrote: “Remember that a painting — before being a war horse, a nude woman or some anecdote or other — is essentially a flat surface covered with colors arranged in a certain order.” This seems worth mentioning because while it’s easy enough to speak of Mr. Hou’s themes — the dissolution of the family, among others — this film is also a flat surface of a different type covered with colors arranged in a certain order. (Plus light!)  In the end what elevates Mr. Hou’s films to the sublime — and this one comes close at times — are not the stories but their telling. In “Flight of the Red Balloon” Mr. Hou plays with light and space on the small canvas that is Simon and Suzanne’s apartment, moving the camera around as gracefully as if it were a brush (or a balloon).  In one magnificent scene the camera floats from one character to the next for roughly eight minutes without a single cut, tracing invisible lines between Simon, Suzanne, Song, an intrusive neighbor and a piano tuner who is working on the family’s old upright. Out of this chaos — Simon playing, Suzanne yelling, the piano tuner tuning, and Song simply moving among them — Mr. Hou creates the world.

Loosely inspired by Albert Lamorisse's 1956 classic "The Red Balloon," Hou Hsiao Hsien's French-language debut gracefully extends his recent thematic concerns -- specifically, with the hectic pace and isolated nature of urban life -- and relocates them to contempo Paris. Filmed with the Taiwanese director's characteristic sensitivity, this eloquent study of loneliness and postmodern drift likely will be received with more admiration than rapture by the helmer's followers. But Juliette Binoche's turn as a harried single mom and pic's enlivening portrait of domestic rupture make this a highly accessible Hou, ensuring healthy fest life and, perhaps, moderately stronger arthouse biz than usual.
Lamorisse's lovely but slender 34-minute short, about a young boy who's followed around Paris by a red balloon, proves a mere starting point for the nearly two-hour "Flight of the Red Balloon." Within Hou's body of work, pic most resembles his Tokyo-set "Cafe Lumiere" in its evocation of a bustling city criss-crossed by train tracks and the sad souls who occasionally traverse them.
Notably, the balloon is less a direct participant here than an idly floating spectator, silently bearing witness to the story of emotionally unsteady mother Suzanne (Binoche), her likable but neglected son Simon (Simon Iteanu) and the boy's watchful nanny, Song (Song Fang), a Chinese-born woman who speaks fluent French.
Hou's camera casually follows Song and Simon as they wander about Paris, strolling through parks, stopping at a local bakery or visiting the Chinese puppet theater where Suzanne works as a voice actress. But for the most part, the action remains confined to Suzanne's artfully cluttered flat, lovingly lit and lensed by Hou's regular d.p., Mark Lee Ping Bing, whose long takes and gentle camera movements capture the rhythms of daily life unspooling.
Rather than favoring an exclusively child's-eye perspective, Hou holds the three central characters tightly within the frame, yet still manages to isolate them, his camera registering the subtlest shifts in tone, tension and body language. As usual with Hou, the film's exquisite visual pleasures will be lost on viewers unreceptive to his patient but emotionally generous sensibility.
Even shorter attention spans will get a regular jolt, however, from Suzanne, an overworked harridan who always looks frazzled, whines constantly about her problems -- most of them having to do with her irresponsible downstairs tenant (Hippolyte Girardot) and Simon's absentee father -- and then tries to overcompensate for her mood-swings with excessive cheerfulness and apologies. Sporting a haphazard blonde dye job, Binoche expertly modulates her character's blend of single-minded careerism and emotional neediness, even suggesting that such impulses are inseparable from her artistic drive.
Hou's fascination with the arts is very much in evidence here, and even allows for a strain of self-reflexivity: Song, a cinema major, references the Lamorisse film early on and later uses her videocamera to record Simon walking around the city with red balloon in tow.
At one point, Hou deliberately dispels the film's digital illusion, plainly showing the wirework used to move the balloon around. But he also locates a sublime poetry in shots of the balloon hovering at a half-open window, or floating high above the rooftops of Paris -- an effortless metaphor for loneliness, but also the promise of beauty in an age all too willing to ignore it.
Commissioned as the first film in a series by the Musee d'Orsay, pic scrupulously avoids any remotely touristy exterior shots of Paris up until the lyrical finale. A few well-chosen French pop standards supplement the delicate piano score.

About a thousand movies ago, I made the truculent, unprovable assertion that if Chinese grandmaster Hou Hsiao-hsien  were French, he'd be the darling of the Lincoln Plazas . Now the moment of truth arrives with Hou's Flight of the Red Balloon —set in Paris, starring Juliette Binoche , and inspired by Albert Lamorisse 's classic kid flick about the friendship between a lonely boy and a curiously sentient crimson inflatable.
Spielbergism avant la lettre , The Red Balloon  was the art-house E.T.  of 1956. Flight of the Red Balloon  is something far more baffling—a literal-minded movie with an amiably free-floating metaphor. Hou, who only screened The Red Balloon  after he was commissioned to remake it by the Musée d'Orsay , has said the Lamorisse film shows the "cruel realities" of childhood. His own version begins as fantasy—as seven-year-old Simon (Simon Iteanu ) addresses the otherwise unnoticed scarlet sphere drifting overhead—and then casually naturalizes, tracking the boy over the roofs of Paris to contemplate the untidy existence he shares with his mother Suzanne (Binoche).
Almost immediately, the balloon's role is assumed by the Chinese film student Song (Song Fang) hired to look after Simon. A would-be guardian angel, she hovers in the boy's vicinity before locating the studio where Suzanne is rehearsing her new, Chinese-inspired puppet show. Like the balloon, Song is round-faced and benign, a preternaturally calm, solitary, self-contained observer. She is also like Hou in that she, too, is a foreigner remaking The Red Balloon , albeit in DV. Unlike him, however, she's fluent in French.
Launched at the same Cannes Film Festival  that premiered Wong Kar Wai 's first non-Chinese-language movie, My Blueberry Nights  (also opening here this week), Flight of the Red Balloon  was as tepidly received by French critics as My Blueberry Nights  was by Americans. But where Wong facilely filtered the alien terrain of Soho and Reno  through his own distinctive lens, Hou appears to have accepted his distance from the material—and worked with it. Flight of the Red Balloon  is explicitly an outsider's movie, full of odd perspectives and founded on dislocation.
As though shooting a silent, Hou wrote a script without dialogue—then discussed each scene with his actors, who had to invent their own lines. This surely accounts for Simon's diffidence as well as Binoche's splendiferous eccentricity. Where actual film student Song Fang essentially plays herself, Binoche was compelled to invent the theatrical character Suzanne. The movie is animated not only by the hide-and-seek antics of the red balloon but by her extravagant turn as a frazzled performance artist. Played with total self-absorption and a corresponding absence of vanity, Suzanne is a harried composition in frowsy blonditude, filmy scarves, and mad décolletage—the most dynamic female protagonist in the Hou oeuvre.
Let's call her the spirit of the place. Paris apartments are cluttered, Parisian lives are messy, the city is shown so congested you can smell the exhaust fumes. To cope, Hou himself has adapted a looser, more lyrical style—using window reflections and shallow focus to layer and otherwise complicate the image. A movie that encourages the spectator to rummage, Flight of the Red Balloon  is contemplative but never static, and punctuated by passages of pure cinema. A medley of racing shadows turns out to be cast by a merry-go-round. A long consideration of the setting sun as reflected on a train window that frames the onrushing landscape yields a sudden flood of light. There's a relaxed interest in backstage technique—the yet-to-be-erased techie visible in Song's film, a puppeteer's hidden "dance" in Suzanne's performance, the use of the end credits as a coda to the movie.
Suzanne's interest in Chinese marionettes links Hou's Red Balloon  (as well as the original) to his 1992 masterpiece, The Puppetmaster . The mode can be off-handedly self-reflexive, as when Hou's camera ponders the virtuosity of two movers maneuvering a piano up an impossibly narrow stairway, or in the melancholy juxtaposition of archaic 8mm home movies with Suzanne's voiceover characterizations. Her vocalizations are crucial: Not only does she provide the voices for her puppets, but also much of the backstory, explicated over the course of two emotional telephone solos—one brilliantly staged behind the light-struck windshield of a moving car, the other played in total domestic chaos, complete with a blind piano tuner going about his business. Typically, Hou's narrative rhythms allow for long periods in which nothing much happens, followed by a cascade of overlapping information. Abruptly it's revealed that Suzanne, who has inherited two tiny flats, wants to get rid of her deadbeat tenant so that her grown daughter can move in downstairs.
Suzanne's situation may be an emotional jumble but, untethered by mundane reality, the balloon is free to roam—variously appearing as an image on the side of a building, a painting at the Musée d'Orsay, a character in Song's movie, and itself, suddenly visible through a skylight, "watching" Song learning how to make crepes. In her last scene, Song—or rather her reflection—shares the screen with the balloon's shadow, its mirrored image, and finally its fleeting presence as it soars up and away, out of the story.
