 A documentary and a three-alarm warning, “Flow” dives into our planet’s most essential resource — and third-largest industry — to find pollution, scarcity, human suffering and corporate profit. And that’s just in the United States.  Yet Irena Salina’s astonishingly wide-ranging film is less depressing than galvanizing, an informed and heartfelt examination of the tug of war between public health and private interests. From the dubious quality of our tap water (possibly laced with rocket fuel) to the terrifyingly unpoliced contents of bottled brands (one company pumped from the vicinity of a Superfund site), the movie ruthlessly dismantles our assumptions about water safety and government oversight.  Still reeling, we’re given a distressing glimpse of regions embroiled in bitter battles against privatization. In South Africa, villagers drink from stagnant ponds, unable to pay for the water that once was free, and protesters in Bolivia — where waste from a slaughterhouse is dumped into Lake Titicaca — brave gunfire to demand unrestricted access to potable water.  And lest we begin to comfort ourselves with first-world distance, Ms. Salina cleverly frames this section with the protracted conflict between the residents of Mecosta County, Mich., and the gluttonous demands of a Nestlé bottling plant.  Naming names and identifying culprits (hello, World Bank), “Flow” is designed to awaken the most somnolent consumer. At the very least it should make you think twice before you take that (unfiltered) shower.

One of those charming little documentaries that make you question whether the human race is really worth preserving, Irena Salina 's Flow: For Love of Water  makes a fairly urgent three-point case: The first point is that much of the world has almost no access to clean water, yet impractical privatization schemes in Bolivia  and South Africa , among other places, have deprived poor people of this vital necessity. Second, even when there's water available, the bottled-water racket leads companies like Nestlé  to package it up and sell it back, causing lasting environmental damage to the places those companies are siphoning from. The last is the most frightening: We're using up the planet's water too fast, and very soon oil wars will be replaced by H20 battles. Salina 's argument trends alarmist—is it really  necessary to call water "blue gold," per activist/author Maude Barlow 's formulation?—but generally rings true. Vomit-inducing shots of blood-red rivers running downstream from slaughterhouses prepare you for the shock of raw-sewage rivers. Aesthetics take a backseat to interviews, footage of water riots (no, really), and protests. Salina concludes with a cry for activism and intervention, but the case she's already built makes the battle seem unwinnable.
