Hoping to reduce his sentence in juvie for a DUI, a hot-tempered high school rugby star (Faris) agrees to lace up for his warden's old team. Like Varsity Blues  and Friday Night Lights , the movie tackles its sport with a religious fervor that treats the field like a church, the coach a prophet, and the inevitable playoff match a sacrament. But Forever Strong , based on real-life events, also shares the secret sin of many a pigskin pic: Despite all the macho posturing, the corny story is just as sappy as anything on Lifetime.

 Devised by committee, plotted by machine and acted on cruise control, “Forever Strong” stages an all-too-familiar teenage morality play on the churned earth of a high school rugby field in Salt Lake City.  For Rick Penning (Sean Faris), that field is his arena to vent against a spineless mother (Julie Warner) and an angry coach and father (Neal McDonough). A belligerent player and all-round pill, Rick is in dire need of an attitude intervention.  So when the time-honored convergence of beer, convertible and hot chick lands him in juvie,  he is on the road to learning more than just how to clean a toilet and smuggle Vicodin.  An After School Special that somehow sneaked into the multiplex, “Forever Strong” operates at the subbasement level of sports as therapy, smashing bodies and jerking tears at rigidly timed intervals. As Rick, under the moral tutelage of Coach  Larry Gelwix (Gary Cole) and his former rivals, learns to replace drinking, drugs and women with prayer circles, community service and Maori chants, the virility of the scrum becomes a spiritual rite of passage.  Based on the coaching philosophies of the real Mr. Gelwix — who deserves a better tribute than this one —  “Forever Strong” is a mawkish drama hobbled by a thoroughly unpleasant and uncharismatic lead performance. The wonder is  that anyone would think Rick is worth saving in the first place.  “Forever Strong” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Characters pop pills, cans and  one another.
This latest variant in the life-lessons-through-youth-sports continuum takes place in a strange alternate America where people care about rugby and drunk drivers careen menacingly around every corner. Star rugger Rick (Sean Faris , cruising on a passably Cruise-like mug) is an out-of-control brat until, during a stint in juvie, he's hooked up with a coach/confessor (Gary Cole ) who offers a two-a-day regimen in ascetic self-discipline and subjugation of the ego to the team. (Valuable morals, sure, but I'd already learned them from Drumline .) Though director Ryan Little  puts together a clean, professional package, at bottom this is a nearly-two-hour scrum of therapeutic direct encounters, with characters forever on-the-button articulating motivations ("What's more important—a game or your son?" "I don't play for your team, I play for myself!"), periodically juiced with buttrock and montages of Rick's rugby team proudly lateralling its way to victory. It should come as no surprise to find that this paean to clean living, which might have been co-scripted by Carrie Nation , was brought to you by the Salt Lake City  film industry. Should play well to church groups and niche sports enthusiasts waiting on the great life-affirming film about curling.
