 In the audacious 10-minute opening sequence of the Israeli director Amos Gitai's "Free Zone," the camera scrutinizes the face of Natalie Portman, who is weeping quietly in the back of a car parked just outside the Western Wall in Jerusalem. On the soundtrack, a singer chants a Passover song "Had Gadia," whose allegorical lyrics describe how a lamb purchased for two pennies is eaten by a cat that is choked by a dog that is beaten by a stick that is burnt by a fire that is doused by water.  The director uses that song as a bitter  metaphorical evocation of Middle Eastern strife.  It is considerably more resonant than much of what follows in  this  deliberately murky film about the crossing of borders and the blurring of national identities. That blurring is made too literal in the cinematography, where gimmicky double exposures overlay scenes from the present and the past.  Ms. Portman's distraught character, Rebecca, is a young American woman with an Israeli father and a non-Jewish mother, who is searching for her identity. For reasons only partly clear, she has just broken up with her Spanish-Israeli fiancé. The film's three main characters, all women, are an American (Ms. Portman), an Israeli (Hanna Laslo) and a Palestinian (Hiam Abbass) whose lives intersect. The best hope for a constructive dialogue in the Middle East, the movie suggests, may lie in the ability of women from every faction to ignore political and ideological differences and communicate in the "free zone" of their common humanity.    The Israeli, Hanna, is the kind of aggressive Jewish matriarch who fearlessly stands up to any obstacle. Ms. Laslo's portrayal of this intrepid powerhouse won her a best actress award at last year's Cannes Film Festival. As the movie begins, she is about to embark on a grueling eight-hour car trip from Israel to the economic free zone in eastern Jordan to collect a debt. Rebecca, at loose ends, decides to accompany her.  Bordered by Syria, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, the free zone, an actual place  that has no customs or taxes, is a Middle Eastern hub of car sales where Arabs and Israelis live peacefully side by side. Hanna intends to collect $30,000 owed to her husband, Moshe, by a car dealer identified only as the American. The movie intimates that the free zone is also a center of war profiteering, if the selling of armored cars to whoever wants them qualifies.  Hanna is substituting for Moshe (Uri Klausner), who has been seriously injured in a terrorist attack. In one of the movie's several lengthy speeches, she regales Rebecca with the history of his frustrated attempts to make a living in agriculture. A man who once sold flowers now runs an armored-car dealership.  At the Israeli border, the women are grilled  as if they were  potential terrorists, but at the Jordanian border they are waved on through. On reaching the office where she is to collect the debt, Hanna is greeted warily by the American's wife, Leila (Ms. Abbass), who tells her that neither her husband nor the money are there.  Determined not to return empty handed, Hanna insists Leila take her to her husband. When they arrive at his farm, they find it set on fire by Palestinian militants, including Leila's angry stepson,   who reviles her for her modern ways. Eventually we meet the American, who is actually a Palestinian (Makram Khoury). Relating a peripatetic history that has carried him from Jordan to the United States and back, he describes a life as scarred by the ceaseless ebb and flow of war as Moshe's.  If the strong performances of its three stars infuse this metaphorically clotted movie with some life, the screenplay (some of which was improvised) has a weak narrative pulse. This political essay posing as a movie makes the mistake of confusing longwinded storytelling with compelling drama.

Three women -- an American, an Israeli and a Palestinian -- become temporary traveling companions in a remote area of Jordan in "Free Zone," Amos Gitai's most satisfying pic since war drama "Kippur" (2000). Schematic set-up is given a human face by fine performances and a physical journey that's often more interesting than the characters' emotional ones, which are weakened by the Israeli auteur's tendency toward convenient doctrinaire-ism and chunks of expository dialogue. Casting of Natalie Portman, in her first movie in the region of her birth, should give this a higher profile on the specialist circuit than Gitai's prior, less mellow pics.
Though she essentially becomes an observer to the drama as the movie progresses, Portman is right up front and center in the opening reels, starting with a 10-minute uninterrupted closeup of her sitting in a car, gently weeping, as a traditional, rondo-like Passover song plays on the soundtrack. From various visual and sonic clues, it becomes clear that the car is parked near Jerusalem's Wailing Wall, Portman's character, Rebecca, is of mixed American-Jewish origins -- she occasionally speaks an odd word of Hebrew -- and she's in the midst of some claustrophobic trauma.
Her driver, at first only heard off-screen, is Hanna (Israeli entertainer Hanna Laslo), a feisty middle-aged woman who says she has an important business meeting across the border in Jordan. Rebecca is only too happy to accompany her, to leave behind some bad memory as yet unexplained.
Border-crossing scenes rather obviously sketch Arab-Israeli differences as first the women are aggressively interrogated by Jewish security forces before being smilingly waved by on the Jordanian side. As the car drives through the wintry landscape, the background to Rebecca's grief -- her breakup with her Spanish-Israeli fiance, Julio (Aki Avni) -- is shown in superimposed scenes.
While serving as a soldier, Julio was apparently involved in some anti-Palestinian atrocity, according to the first of several didactic lumps of dialogue which pepper the pic and markedly contrast with the more natural dialogue between the women as the story unfolds.
Hanna heads toward an area in northeast Jordan, bordered by Syria, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, known as the Free Zone, a customs and tax-free region where all nationalities of people mingle to buy and sell cars. In a flashback devoted to Hanna, it emerges that her husband, Moshe (Uri Klauzner), who sells armored cars to Iraqis, has been wounded in an explosion, and she's going in his place to collect a $30,000 debt owed by his business partner, known only as "The American."
As the car trundles through Jarash and Amman, and then across bleak desert landscape, pic initially looks like it is becoming a road movie in which the Free Zone (which actually exists) is used as a metaphor for Mid-Eastern practicality, free of politics, religion and borders.
In fact, the area -- a large car dump that's only briefly seen -- doesn't function as the end of the women's journey, which diverges in several interesting, but sometimes dramatically clunky, ways to a rather too trite ending.
Film really starts to become involving at a human level -- and Rebecca is sidelined to observer status -- when Hanna meets Leila (Palestinian thesp Hiam Abbass, from "The Syrian Bride"), who proves evasive over where "The American" and his money really are. In the first of several sparky scenes between the two actresses, Hanna and Leila flatter, cajole and play along with each other, providing the one real relationship in the movie that manages to translate the movie's weighty subtexts into real cinema.
As far as the script allows her, Portman acquits herself at an OK level as an American conflicted by her mixed ethnicity. Among supporting players, veteran Arab-Christian actor Makram Khoury is solid as ever, though at one point his character too is lumbered with a long, speech better suited to the classroom than a human drama. Spanish thesp Carmen Maura, almost unrecognizable, appears briefly in a flowery turn as Julio's mom, in flashback.
Deliberately untouristy look of the film, with well-known spots like the Wailing Wall and Roman Jarash hardly glimpsed, is enhanced by Laurent Brunet's functional, everyday lensing. In many respects, the physical journey is the freshest aspect of "Free Zone" -- pic is the first Israeli production shot in co-operation with the Jordanian Royal Film Commission -- taking the average viewer into rarely seen areas that the script only partly manages to dramatize satisfyingly.

Straight out of the gate, Free Zone  is ready for its close-up—in this case, a nine-minute fixed shot of Natalie Portman  in profile, crying, recovering, and bursting into tears again as she gazes out a car window. Not since the final scene of Tsai Ming- liang's Vive L'Amour  has a film enacted such a patient testament to convulsive waterworks, and crybabies everywhere will applaud Ms. Portman's possibly unsurpassed mastery of the lachrymal arts (see also her bravura sobbing freak-out in V for Vendetta ).
As characters in Amos Gitai 's films are incapable of non-metaphorical acts, we know that Portman's Rebecca is crying for an entire region; just to be sure, the button-pushing Israeli director places her near the Wailing Wall . An American in Israel , Rebecca leaves her fiancé, Julio (Aki Avni), after he confesses to his participation in an apparent atrocity at a refugee camp; Julio recounts the episode within a flashback, as Gitai renders present and immediate past through multiple superimpositions, layering the images like delicate sheaths of tissue paper. Not long after the heartbroken girl hitches a ride to anywhere with brassy Hanna (Hanna Laslo ), however, both Rebecca and the movie's early enthusiasm for visual experimentation recede in deference to the main event: the battle of wills between Hanna and cool, mournful Leila (Hiam Abbass  of Paradise Now ), a Palestinian. Hanna's husband sells armored cars in the "free zone" of eastern Jordan, where customs duties and taxes are waived; when he's injured in an unexplained blast, Hanna drives to the free zone to seize a $30,000 debt from Leila, or rather, from her mysterious "American" associate.
Free Zone  thrives on its performances—watch as Laslo's Hanna makes a sisterly touch of hands with Leila and then starts bullying her anew. Forever stuck in traffic or haggling at borders, Gitai's characters inhabit a familiar state of chronic aggravation, which further inflames the allegorical standoff between Hanna and Leila. Per usual, Gitai largely eschews exposition, but his reticence sits awkwardly beside his penchant for saddling his deliberately stereotyped figures with trite, unwieldy speeches and symbolic-ironic biographical data. Oddly, in representing a private conflict as the microcosm of an unsolvable catastrophe, Free Zone  only manages to miniaturize both.
