 “Full Battle Rattle,” a new documentary by Tony Gerber and Jesse Moss, gives a remarkably thorough and detailed account of the difficult conditions facing American soldiers in Iraq. The filmmakers follow an Army battalion under the command of Lt. Col. Robert McLaughlin as it tries to bring a semblance of order and stability to a fractious Iraqi town menaced by violence. The soldiers must adjudicate disputes between Sunni and Shiite Muslims, prop up the local authorities and fight off insurgents, who are hidden in plain sight in the middle of town and carry out roadside bomb and rocket attacks at the worst possible moments.  Since there have already been quite a few ground-level Iraq documentaries, all of this might sound like a familiar scenario. Except that in the case of “Full Battle Rattle,” a scenario is literally what is involved. The Iraqi village of Medina Wasl is, in effect, a movie set, part of a training site built and operated by the Army in the Mojave Desert. Colonel McLaughlin’s earnest  campaign to win hearts and minds and fight a successful — or at least nondisastrous — counterinsurgency is an exercise, a preparation for the real dangers he and his soldiers  will face when they deploy to the actual Iraq.  Medina Wasl is populated by actual Iraqis: refugees from that country who role-play various officials and civilians. The insurgents are American soldiers, some of whom clearly relish a chance to be the bad guys. In the course of three weeks the battalion moves through several stages of engagement, identified in chapter titles (“Reconstruction,” “Insurgency” and so on) that suggest a microcosm of the larger war. The soldiers travel between their temporary base and the town, spending time at checkpoints and in long meetings with the mayor, the deputy mayor and the chief of police.  Meanwhile, a group of coordinators in civilian clothes controls events in the town, toying with human fates like fantasy gamers or Olympian gods out of Homer. They plot “inserts” — unexpected but never implausible events that complicate the mission. Medina Wasl, with its hand-lettered signs and functional architecture, starts to feel more and more like an unpredictable, even hopeless place, and Colonel McLaughlin’s stoical self-confidence takes a beating. He takes his job of bringing “peace and prosperity” and “a brighter future” to Medina Wasl seriously and is dismayed to find  that a straight-talking can-do attitude will not necessarily get him very far toward this goal.  It has been more than five years since the war began and about four since the first documentaries about it began to come out. The predominant style has been modified cinéma vérité, in which portable digital video cameras give a feeling of intimacy and immediacy and political views are implicit or omitted altogether.  Like many of its predecessors, “Full Battle Rattle” takes no overt side in any arguments about the cause and course of the war. Instead the film emphasizes the strangeness and complexity of the conflict, and also the endlessness that seems to be its most salient feature. Military personnel rotate through Medina Wasl en route to and from tours of duty in Iraq. Iraqis who have fled their country recreate fragments of it in the California desert, and the surreal encounters between them seem like a fact of life, or an episode of reality television.

A so-so pic on an incendiary subject, "Full Battle Rattle" follows the training regimen of one battalion during engagement and occupation in one of 13 fake "villages" comprising a massive Iraq simulation somewhere in the Mojave Desert. Startling subject matter will propel the item to numerous fest slots with attendant pro-and-con debate, though pic feels more like tube and DVD material.
Fictitious burg of Medina Wasl is part of the National Training Center at California's Ft. Irwin Military Reservation, the last stop for soldiers on their way to Iraq. Referred to by someone as "one big TV reality show," the complex employs 1,600 hired role players, of which 250 are native Iraqis, many of whom live in on site during the exercises. They're given names, ID numbers, positions, even backstories, and coached to never break character during operations.
During this particular three-week period, gung-ho Lt. Col. Robert McLaughlin leads his green troops against some pesky Iraqi insurgents, played by returning U.S. servicemen who look like they're having a ball raising hell.
Nine scripted stages of skirmish, ranging from "occupation" to "endgame" and "withdrawal," are punctuated by profiles of the native Iraqis. From the "deputy mayor" with higher political ambitions to the "assistant police chief" forced to take time off to fight U.S. immigration in the real world, their stories are as earnest as they are improbable.
Players' every move is plotted by a group of simulation architects who sit around the conference table throwing scenarios at one another. Most surreal moment finds one Iraqi villager cheerfully recounting how grateful her mother back home is that her daughter's able to wear traditional garb on a day-to-day basis -- and how happy she is to be able to send her wages back to support mom in Baghdad.
What prevents the pic from soaring to the level of expose, ironically, is that helmers Tony Gerber and Jesse Moss come across as perhaps too nonjudgmental. Though impartiality is to be applauded in the docu form, auds predisposed to shock at the absurdist nature of the proceedings will chafe that neither Gerber nor Moss ever interject to ask just what the hell's going on. Supporters, on the other hand, may be distressed to learn McLaughlin's battle is an uphill one.
Tech package is adequate, the snazzy interstitial graphics offset by Paul Brill's heavyhanded score. Subtle recycling of some footage as the story progresses suggests structural and/or coverage challenges. Burl Ives' "Cowboy's Lament" offers a tart music bed for closing credits, as well as a glimpse of the tonal road not taken.
Camera (color, HD), Gerber, Moss, Adam Keker; editors, Alex Hall, Pax Wasserman, Youna Kwak; music, Paul Brill; sound (Dolby Digital), Patrick Cicero; associate producer, Natalie Chavoya. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama: Documentaries), Feb. 10, 2008. (Also in SXSW Film Festival.) Running time: 92 MIN.
 


The epitome of brutal realism, war on the ground is the subject of elaborate fantasy in two deceptively modest, highly self-conscious films, Tony Gerber  and Jesse Moss 's Iraq  (or rather "Iraq") documentary Full Battle Rattle  and Serge Bozon's dark and goofy World War I romance, La France .
A combat doc once removed from combat and twice mediated by stagecraft, Full Battle Rattle  depicts simulated war in a theme-park reality. Part scripted, part improvised, the doings on a back-lot battlefield are experienced as the real thing—whether actual war movie or actual war. As suggested by its title (Army slang for 50 pounds of protective gear), Full Battle Rattle  is a costume film. The set is a facsimile Iraqi village, somewhere (along with a dozen other such villages) in the National Training Center, a 1,000-square-mile chunk of the Mojave  (location for countless westerns and sci-fi films), inhabited by some 1,600 role-players, mostly Iraqi refugees hired by the military and American soldiers. The latter not only play themselves but also, as coached by Hollywood  actors like Carl "Apollo Creed " Weathers, Iraqi insurgents.
Back in the day, the NTC used to be the site for Cold War games pitting the U.S. Army  against the dreaded Krasnovian invaders, rolling through a (post-nuclear?) swath of an imaginary Eastern Europe . For the past several years, this simulated, interactive Iraq—irresistibly comic and deeply disturbing—has served as an introduction for American troops to actual Iraq.
Tracking the education of an Iraq-bound battalion and its by-the-book colonel, Full Battle Rattle  looks just like a regular war movie. The slippage is constant. The soldiers naturally feel as if they're in a movie, even if the field hospital is populated by a mix of "wounded" soldiers and artfully mangled dummies. Given the situation that might have been conceived by Philip K. Dick  (or Walt Disney ), the documentary could have been devised to satirize the theses of French theorists Jean Baudrillard  and Paul Virilio . "In industrialized warfare," Virillo wrote in War and Cinema , "the representation of events outstripped the presentation of facts."
An information officer interviewed by the filmmakers inevitably compares the setup to reality TV. And, as in life, everything that happens in the NTC is shown on TV. Call it The True Man Show . In their effort to train soldiers for all contingencies, including civil war, the largely invisible powers-that-be script staged executions, attacks, and, most intricately, a checkpoint accident. Afterward, the guilty soldiers hand out fake reparation money—too much, as it turns out.
Set off by sprightly graphics and shimmering with over-bright colors, Full Battle Rattle  has a fake transparency. The movie arouses, without gratifying, a desire to see the camera—not to mention the hidden command center where the scenarios are devised. It's somewhat too seamless, even if the filmmakers do break the illusion to interview American soldiers and Iraqi role-players. (Most of them seem to live in San Diego; all are—or seek to be—U.S. citizens.) Lurking around the periphery, American "insurgents" confide to the camera that they are planning to kill as many people as possible. Sure enough, in one late movie set-piece, the insurgents launch a surprise attack on a celebratory banquet attended by both the village mayor and the colonel. The latter is bizarrely cool. Assuring all that his men have the situation in hand, he turns speechless when "casualties" stagger in dressed up in newly applied zombie wounds. Having lost the game big-time, the colonel wonders if he is a failure. Cut to a staged military funeral, where the attendees cry real tears.
As well they might: The show ends with the American actors being sent to Iraq as the Iraqi performers prepare to entertain their next batch of recruits. The filmmakers alternate a few stories: American families are separated; Iraqi families are reunited in America. (One Iraqi amuses relatives by showing them the tape of his staged execution.) The movie reports that out of 1.4 million Iraqi DPs, fewer than 600 have found refuge in the U.S. A sizable portion of these fortunate few have made lives in the virtual villages of the NTC—speaking Arabic, wearing traditional clothes, eating traditional food, staging mock weddings and funerals. ("For real, we're family," one tells the filmmakers.) One of the many surreal aspects of this fabulously disorienting movie: its representation of an Iraqi heaven that's an American hell.
As low-tech as Full Battle Rattle  is high-concept, La France  is a platoon film unlike any I've ever seen, although, steeped in movie history, critic turned director Serge Bozon claims both Hollywood and Soviet World War II movies as his models.
La France  treats the first total war with fairy-tale matter-of-factness. The movie opens in May 1917, nearly three years into World War I. French farm girl Camille (Sylvie Testud ) receives a letter from her soldier husband warning that she will not hear from and perhaps never see him again. That night, she crops her hair and sets off for the front in the guise of a 17-year-old boy. Her adventures are at once dreamlike and prosaic: Wandering in the woods, she stumbles upon an encampment of sleeping soldiers. Perhaps imagining that she is invisible, Camille lies down among them.
