         Any movie that starts in a wax-fruit factory can't be all bad. "Funny Money," a screwball comedy starring Chevy Chase, has its charms, but to experience them requires patience.
 
  Based on a West End hit, director and co-adapter Leslie Greif's film takes unfortunately long to get rolling. Once the farce finds its stride, however, it's generally worth the wait.
 


         






    Chase plays "creature of habit" Henry Perkins, a factory executive in a rut so deep he can't see over the walls. This ordinary guy falls into an extraordinary situation when his briefcase gets switched for one stuffed with $5 million in ill-gotten gains. Before Henry and high-strung, aspiring-artist wife Carol (Penelope Ann Miller) can flee the country with the cash, they must navigate a crooked cop (Armand Assante, so grimy you can smell him), Romanian bad guys, a house full of guests and various others.
 
  Farces like this don't worry their pretty little heads about clichés or logic (despite being one of the dullest men alive, Henry and his wife have dozens of hip young friends); they're all about pitch and pacing. The old briefcase switcheroo should take a couple of minutes to set up but here feels drawn out.
 
  Strangely, Chase lacks energy early on. When he does get going, it's nice to see the comic actor in his element, desperately piling bigger and bigger lies higher and higher so they teeter precariously. Miller seems pushed un-til the movie catches up to her level.
 
  Supporting players make some of the strongest impressions. As Henry's buddy Vic, Christopher McDonald finds the flow nicely. Alex Meneses as Vic's lusty wife, Gina, and Rebecca Wisocky as the debauched Mme. Virginia are right on time. When they all mesh in the mounting chaos, "Funny Money" gets its groove on.
 
  The transformation from play to film isn't entirely successful, as the dialogue — especially the exposition — often sounds stagy. If indie distributor ThinkFilm ("Half Nelson," "Shortbus") seems an unlikely studio for a Chevy Chase farce, the movie does have its arty touches, such as the occasional use of split screen.
 
  Greif gets in some good sight gags (including references to "The Exorcist" and "Dr. No") and as the film builds to its wild-party denouement, one expects to see swinging hipsters doing the frug. Sadly, it doesn't go quite that far.
 
  "Funny Money." MPAA rating: Unrated. Running time:
 
  1 hour, 37 minutes. In general release.   


A triumph of form over content, Leslie Greif's American filmization of Ray Cooney's 1995 hit English farce "Funny Money" makes a surprisingly fitting, if demographically dubious, Chevy Chase vehicle. Pic's bare-bones pretext, involving a suitcase full of money, eschews psychology and witty dialogue in favor of split-second comic timing, as convoluted lie-upon-lie and extraneous character-upon-character pile up a teetering construct of predictable gags delivered at breakneck speed. Well-directed slapstick, which preemed at Aspen's Comedy Fest, may prove a tricky sell, however; the childless, highly sex-oriented update of Chase's escapism-questing Griswold persona is not precisely family fare. 
Toiling as a foreman in a wax fruit factory, Henry (a greyer, timeworn Chase) is a dull creature of habit and unvarying routines, to the despair of his more adventurous wife Carol (Penelope Ann Miller). But a mix-up of briefcases effects a sea-change, gifting Henry with $5 million in unmarked bills belonging to the Romanian mafia. 
With a firm grasp of the situation, Henry calmly books a getaway flight to Barcelona, whereupon a fearful Carol freaks out, having learned to be careful what she wishes for.
Most of pic's action is theatrically staged in Henry and Carol's Hoboken brownstone, as, in classic farce mode, a variety of characters with different agendas start trickling, then veritably pouring in. Each entrance requires increasingly improbable and self-contradictory explanations from Henry, as characters are stashed in extra rooms or banished outdoors, popping in and out again to belie Henry's already threadbare fictions.
Soon the joint is jumping with drop-ins, chief among them Armand Assante, magnificent in an atypical comic turn as a vice cop on the take. Also on hand is Robert Loggia, impressive as Henry's boss Feldman, a white-haired lothario with a perpetual Viagra-enhanced boner. Less stellar support is provided by Christopher McDonald and Alex Menenses as Henry and Carol's best friends. A trio of armed Romanian goons in search of their missing "brerfcurse" round out the cast. Assorted mayhem, including several elaborately staged pratfalls, spit-takes, a slo-mo gun battle and Miller's escalating drunken hysteria, ensues. 
Greif obviously ascribes to the Blake Edwardian school of comedy, laying out gags with commendable topographical precision. But, unlike Edwards' unique mixture of sophistication and slapstick, "Funny Money" falls squarely in the tradition of pure farce, itself an anomaly in this age of aggressively abrasive personality comedies.
Tech credits are excellent, particularly veteran cinematographer Bill Butler's solid lensing, catching the free-for-all action crisply, ably aided by pic's triumvirate of editors.
