
As any Publishers Clearing House winner can attest: Dreams do come true! I've been hoping for two years that people who don't write about movies or stalk them at film festivals would get to experience the wonderful vagaries of Andrew Bujalski's ''Funny Ha Ha," which, after languishing who knows where, finally opens today at the Coolidge, while his second film just played at last week's Independent Film Festival of Boston.
It's both obvious and inexplicable why the release of ''Funny Ha Ha" went nowhere for so long. Obvious: The film lacks polish. Inexplicable: That's part of its charm. (Bujalski has a bracingly unadorned style, and Matthias Grunsky's handheld photography is actually quite lovely.) Obvious: The cast is full of amateurs, especially Kate Dollenmayer, the woman playing Marnie, the film's heroine. Inexplicable: She is also one of the most simply complicated movie characters I've ever seen.
Marnie is 23, lives in the post-college, crypto-slacker ghettos of Allston, and is unmoored, unambitious, and freshly fired from a mediocre office job. She prefers to wear T-shirts and is a sweetly impulsive drunk. Her to-do list consists of such goals as ''become a better cook," ''go to museums," and, my favorite, ''spend more time outside." And the Scarlett Johansson of ''Lost in Translation" and Anna Karina in the Jean-Luc Godard movie of your choice are her kindred spirits.
But, honestly, Marnie isn't that fancy. Dollenmayer acts with refreshing understatement, and there's eloquence in her gracelessness. You've borrowed this girl's literature notes back in college, you've tried to pick her up once at a party, you've seen her staring into space alone on her front stoop. She's like a lot of upbeat people with no immediate plans for the future and nothing glamorous in mind, and nearly everything about her life is a misalliance, particularly where romance is concerned.
One of the beauties of Bujalski's writing and directing is the way little slights resonate with Marnie. She has to hear from Rachel and Dave (Jennifer L. Schaper and Myles Paige) that Alex (Christian Rudder), her longstanding crush, has just broken up with his girlfriend. That's ridiculous: She just ran into him, and he didn't mention that at all. But, as ''Funny Ha Ha" illustrates with great accuracy, that's life.
Alex's sister, Susan (Lissa Patton Rudder), tells Marnie she should pursue Alex, who, in a humiliating and awkward moment, calls Marnie to say, politely, back off. But Alex is a burgeoning master of the mixed signal, saying they should talk some more about this, and also telling her about a job doing research for his uncle. Meanwhile, Marnie lets Mitchell (Bujalski), a painfully meek yet surprisingly direct co-worker at a temp gig she takes, think she has a boyfriend. She has no real interest in Mitchell but out of guilt -- or boredom -- keeps him around, anyway.
Bujalski's circle of characters and the social and romantic entanglements among them start to resemble the webs in Jane Austen and Edith Wharton, if either woman wrote for the post-collegiate Trader Joe's set. Marnie's life is less resolved than in Austen and far less tragic than in Wharton. (Whit Stillman's more poised and more self-conscious ''Metropolitan" comes to mind, too.)
Where class determined attraction in those books, good timing and personal taste dictate the pairings in ''Funny Ha Ha." So Alex's vagueness and passive-aggressive tactics make him a thoroughly modern love interest. And all the hypo-masculine, almost fey affect of this movie's males locates them on a small planet of halting and insecure man-boy stars such as Tobey Maguire and Jake Gyllenhaal. Half the appeal of pursuing such a man lies in waiting to see whether he'll ever declare himself.
''Funny Ha Ha" is a smartly observed, unpretentious, and unconventional comedy of manners -- or more properly, it's a comedy of mannerisms, for none of its addled characters seems capable of composing a thought without stopping along the way to consider it. During that phone call to Marnie, Alex says: ''I don't know. It's just. I mean. You know what I'm saying? It's just . . . a bad time for me."

I imagined my mother listening to all the inserted ''likes" and ''you knows" used here and asking with exasperation, ''Will they ever finish a thought?" But these characters' inarticulateness is perfect for their inchoate feelings. Bujalski's is one of the first movies to put such sensitive and true characters on screen in all their imperfections. He deserves a good, long career, something that returns us to what took so long for it to get started -- the craven distributors and exhibitors of the world. To them, there's this to say: To ignore him is to ignore the stammering voice of a generation.

arnie (Kate Dollenmayer) is 23, and she drifts through "Funny Ha Ha," Andrew Bujalski's low-budget first feature, in search of love and employment - with pretty disappointing results. The young men she is drawn to don't reciprocate, and she can't quite bring herself to respond to the one guy who seems to be genuinely smitten with her. After temping for a while, she finds a job doing research for a professor, which seems reasonably tolerable. What gives this film its quiet pathos is not so much the relative bleakness of Marnie's circumstances but the modesty of her expectations. At one point, she makes a to-do list, and its lack of ambition - "spend more time outdoors," "make friends with Jackie," "learn to play chess" - is both funny and sad. Marnie would never admit to anything more acute than mild depression, and Mr. Bujalski captures the ache of her existence without pity or melodrama. She is lonely, but far from alone, because "Funny Ha Ha," much as it is the story of a few difficult, uneventful months in her life, is also a deft group portrait of recent college graduates - her friends, co-workers and would-be lovers - groping their way across the flatlands of early adulthood. Their conversational tics sound at once stylized and improvised, and the movie's narrative rhythms are loose and ambling. It feels as artless and scattered as Marnie and her cohort, who wear old T-shirts with holes in them and decorate their apartments with nondescript furniture, some of it probably hauled in from the sidewalk. But this scruffiness is a bit deceptive, as "Funny Ha Ha" has both a subtle, delicate shape and a point. Like John Cassavetes, whose influence is apparent here, Mr. Bujalski is an acute and intelligent dramatist who uses the appearance of chaos as a means of emotional exploration. I would bet that the ragged, swerving scenes in his film are much more tightly scripted and carefully rehearsed than they sometimes seem, which was almost always the case with Cassavetes. The main difference is that while Cassavetes's characters are often at the mercy of their feelings and pushed to the point of eruption, Mr. Bujalski's are cut off from theirs, and able to communicate only by painful, semi-ironic indirection. If it were not so resolutely modest, and so rigorously confined in its minute observations of individual behavior, you might almost call "Funny Ha Ha," which was completed in 2002, a generational statement. But that would be false to both the film's aesthetic and to its insights. Mr. Bujalski's characters do not make statements; they barely make eye contact with one another, and they communicate in a hesitant, noncommittal idiom, prefacing every utterance with phrases like "I don't know" and "I'm sorry." They spend their days working in grungy offices and their evenings drinking beer and eating hummus at impromptu parties. The anomie of middle-class 20-somethings is hardly an unexplored subject in American movies, and "Funny Ha Ha" might at first glance be taken as yet another example of post-"Slacker" indie solipsism. But Mr. Bujalski's artistic self-confidence and the low-key idiosyncrasy of his cast resist such easy labeling. This movie feels less like a careerist calling card than like a genuine effort to use film - and it is film, rather than the more modish digital video - to probe and reveal the curious facts and stubborn puzzles of contemporary life. It is a small, plain movie, shot in 16 millimeter in dull locations around Boston; but also, like its passive, quizzical heroine, it is unexpectedly seductive, and even, in its own stubborn, hesitant way, beautiful.

Andrew Bujalski's quietly impressive "Funny Ha Ha" uses the uncertain future of a smart but shy, post-graduate Boston woman as the launching pad for a beautifully observant and wholly unpretentious film with roots more in Cassavetes than Sundance-style showbiz. Made under the sway of the DIY (Do It Yourself) art movement, pic is a deliberate throwback to a much earlier American indie period, when filmmakers shot on 16mm, recorded in mono and didn't bother with a production company moniker. Besides being a surefire fest item, the film could have a bracing effect on adventurous auds and young filmmakers alike given the right distrib handling.
"Funny Ha Ha" serves as a memorable debut for first-time thesp Kate Dollenmayer, whose Marnie becomes unselfconsciously emblematic of an entire generation of over-educated, under-employed American youth.
Marnie is first seen drunk at a tattoo parlor, but she's hardly some "bad girl"; rather, she seems to take each step through life gingerly, not quite sure where to walk next. Randomness seems to rule her existence: She runs into friends Dave and Rachel (Myles Paige, Jennifer L. Schaper) and tags along with them to dinner, where she admits to Rachel that she has a crush on Alex (Christian Rudder) but instinctively -- and, it eventually turns out, correctly -- senses that it will go nowhere.
Film introduces characters and situations, and then allows them to percolate naturally to the surface. At her new temp office job, Marnie is seated alongside nice but ultra-nebbishy Mitchell (Bujalski), whose awkward way of showing interest in her doesn't emerge until his desperation move on her during her last day on the job.
The subsequent dates between Marnie and Mitchell surely rank among the most painfully awkward and real encounters between the sexes in recent movies, culminating in the sort of thoughtless and spontaneous behavior that goes on all the time in real life, but almost never on screen.
Bujalski's improv approach is gracefully married with a style that is not overly-dramatic, and therefore seems just a hair short of pure documentary. Even unexpected encounters that other directors may have exploited for intense dramatic effect, such as a drunk Dave suddenly kissing Marnie in a car, play out and then fade away with the natural pulse of everyday life.
Just as underplayed are myriad character details, such as Marnie's evident interest in religion, that are gently observed but never underlined.
The non-pro cast appears inspired from the first frame, none more so than Dollenmayer, who invests Marnie with a genuine expression of innocence concealing a certain adult wisdom that keeps her out of serious trouble. Dollenmayer is uncommonly attuned to Marnie's moment-by-moment responses --and knack for confused and confusing conversations, the film's constant source of wit.
Tech package couldn't be less slick, and this becomes the movie's true badge of honor.

Most of the ha-ha's in Funny Ha Ha  are not exactly funny: Andrew Bujalski 's debut feature is foremost a squirming comedy of recognition. This Boston ultra-indie—which Bujalski wrote, directed, edited, and co-starred in—slouches through the blurry limbo of post-collegiate existence, a period at once ephemeral and cruelly decisive. It opens with 23-year-old heroine Marnie (Kate Dollenmayer ) stumbling into a tattoo parlor, where the proprietor refuses to ink her because she's plastered. This movie about the fear of the permanent—and the barely conscious, unwittingly reckless processes behind life-altering decisions—might be subtitled The Possibly Indelible Adventures of a Desultory Twentysomething .
Funny Ha Ha  proceeds in slackerly fits and starts: Marnie drifts between numbing temp jobs and mulls over romantic prospects that are either undesirable or unobtainable. A long-harbored, not-so-secret crush on college pal Alex (Christian Rudder of the Brooklyn  band Bishop Allen) flares up when he splits with his girlfriend. A flurry of brutally inept matchmaking within their circle of mutual acquaintances culminates in an excruciating phone call (later topped by a painful encounter at the neighborhood supermarket). Meanwhile, in a luckless role reversal, Marnie is pursued by Mitchell (Bujalski), a dorky co-worker who makes his move with the conversation stopper "So, like, what's your deal?"
Shot on 16mm in an unassuming pseudo-vérité, Funny Ha Ha  is less offhand than it first appears. (The grainy, gangly naturalism and an early rave from critic and Cassavetes expert Ray Carney  have prompted a string of somewhat misleading comparisons with the forefather of American independent film.) A movie full of goofy-cute people conducting profoundly casual and casually profound conversations littered with dangling sentences and pockets of dead air, it's seemingly designed to elicit a collective c'est moi  from twentysomething hipster enclaves across the country. But Bujalski doesn't just reproduce the halting, roundabout patterns of actual talk—he has a keen ear for the defensive and passive-aggressive uses of inarticulate speech.
Alex's evasiveness has a lot to do with his selfish desire to preserve the status quo—he's in a position to enjoy his ambiguously flirtatious rapport with Marnie more than she is. Mitchell, perhaps strategically, alternates fumbling shyness with obnoxious bluntness. And Marnie, especially in dealing with Mitchell, conceals her more manipulative impulses behind a convenient air of eccentric distraction. Churning up mixed messages and conflicting intentions, Bujalski keeps the mood deftly poised between funny and sad. At her lowest, Marnie composes a to-do list, complete with little check boxes, which includes "learn to play chess?" and "fitness initiative!!" In the next scene, she's enlisted the gauche Mitchell to help out—though the leisurely afternoon of basketball and board games turns sour in elaborately queasy ways.
Structured around nonevent and inaction, Funny Ha Ha  recalls Jamie Thraves 's 2000 British indie The Low Down , a neglected mini-masterpiece of quarter-life malaise. Bujalski's film likewise thrums with ambivalent dread—underlying the characters' inert indecision is a reluctance to let the rest of their lives begin, not least for fear that it might prove an undifferentiated haze. The final scene is as close to perfection as any Amerindie has come in recent memory—in a single reaction of Marnie's, we see a small but definite shift in perspective; abruptly, Bujalski stops the film, as if there's nothing more to say. It's a wonderful parting shot for a movie that locates the momentous in the mundane.
