Jim Carrey and Tea Leoni play Dick and Jane Harper, one of those supersuccessful suburban couples for whom there's nowhere to go but up, up, up. Until, of course, their luck runs out.
After Dick loses his long-awaited vice president job in a corporate corruption scandal (he was just a patsy), the Harpers make a fast, hilarious skid into poverty.
Dick has to trade in his new BMW for a beat-up Ford, their meals come from soup kitchens, and the housekeeper has to be paid with their new appliances. When their only child catches mom and dad hauling away the plasma screen television, he wails the way kids do for a dead pet.
The joke is not that the Harpers are poor. It's that they handle their indigence ridiculously: The sight of the family being reduced to bathing via oscillating lawn sprinkler is one of several very funny humiliations. And there is even lower for them to go.
Facing foreclosure on their McMansion, Dick and Jane let go of their remaining shreds of civility and turn larcenous. They rob banks, coffee shops, and car dealerships, always in disguise (once, outrageously, as a gender-reversed Sonny and Cher), until the TVs are back and their brown lawn is green again.
But Dick and Jane are dismayed to discover that Dick's former co-workers have become just as desperate in their joblessness -- cockfighting rings and pot harvesting! Plus, Dick is facing indictment. So he aims his rebellion at the riches of his old boss, played by Alec Baldwin with a Colonel Sanders accent.
Writers Nicholas Stoller and Judd Apatow (''The 40-Year-Old Virgin") have refashioned ''Dick and Jane" from the 1977 George Segal-Jane Fonda vehicle that riffed on ''Bonnie and Clyde." Their remake is more devilish, hitting its targets with the reckless glee required for a round of Whac-A-Mole.
The setting is California in 2000, at the start of a wave of corporate scandals, and the movie plugs into the popular intolerance, cynicism, and ambivalence toward the world's megacompanies: We can't live with 'em, but . . .
The film, however, doesn't collapse under the weight of its righteousness. As satires go, this is a drive-by shooting that tickles. Director Dean Parisot has directed episodes of ''Monk" and that short-lived gem ''Bakersfield, P.D.," as well as the sci-fi spoof, ''Galaxy Quest." For ''Dick and Jane," his touch is light and his pacing is speedy without turning slick.
I only wished the movie slowed down to appreciate the good actors who turn up in microscopic parts, including Stacey Travis, Laurie Metcalf, and John Michael Higgins. (Ralph Nader has a cameo, too, and there's a fine lampoon of Lou Dobbs.) The underappreciated Richard Jenkins does find time to pocket a few scenes. He plays a senior corporate crook who's now the spineless drunk helping Dick and Jane get revenge on Baldwin.
Jenkins is his usual great self, and Carrey and Leoni are theirs, too. He's rubber. She's Teflon. Watch him slide off her nerves. It's good to see Leoni purely enjoying herself after the impossible stress of ''Spanglish." She gets to be a comedian again, not a punching bag.
And Carrey's previous forays into seriousness have given ballast to his lunatic physicality. Now when his body breaks down, his heart appears to follow. In one scene, Dick, having suffered his last indignity, watches Jane sleep in peace. His face is covered in dirt. His eyes have welled up with tears. And he gives a speech about being fed up with living this way.
A few years ago, this moment would have been Carrey mugging in another throwaway comedy. Now he's Henry Fonda in ''The Grapes of Wrath."
.

         "Fun With Dick & Jane" plays like the setup for a movie that never materializes. It has all the elements for a successful comedy, but once the premise is presented, the film doesn't know how to deliver on its promise. That doesn't mean there is no fun in "Fun." With gifted professionals like Jim Carrey and Téa Leoni in the starring roles, a script co-written by Judd Apatow ("The 40 Year-Old Virgin") and direction by Dean Parisot ("Galaxy Quest"), it would have to have amusing moments, and it does.
 
  But although a lot of attention has clearly gone into making those small moments funny, no one has thought to give "Dick & Jane" any big ones. Instead of building on them, the film's incidents simply follow one another before culminating in a resolution that is both over-complicated and underdeveloped.
 


         






    The time is certainly appropriate for a remake of the 1977 Jane Fonda-George Segal vehicle about well-off people resorting to a life of crime when they can't make those pesky ends meet. And the new "Dick & Jane" gets a lot of mileage out of being set in our current age of corporate excess. Disgraced executives at places like Enron and Tyco are given prominent "special thanks" in the closing credits, and much of what happens to high-flying corporation Globodyne seems patterned on the Enron imbroglio.
 
  Before we get to Globodyne, we meet the Harpers. Dick (Carrey) is a well-off executive, a bit jealous of a neighbor's special-order Mercedes but otherwise happily married to travel agent Jane (Leoni) and pleased to be the father of 6-year-old Billy.
 
  Back at the office, Dick gets the call he's been waiting for. He's being promoted to vice president of communications, a job that includes rubbing shoulders with Chief Financial Officer Frank Bascombe (Richard Jenkins) and the company's legendary chief executive, Jack McCallister. Jack is nicely played by Alec Baldwin, who had a similar role in "Elizabethtown" and is becoming the actor of choice to portray blustery tycoons with questionable values. Though Jane quits her job on the strength of Dick's promotion, his situation is a set-up. He's being made the company fall guy, tapped to announce Globodyne's quarterly projections as the company goes up in smoke. Then Dick is out of a job and finds that his pension is gone as well.
 
  Much of "Dick & Jane" is concerned with how the family copes as Dick finds it close to impossible to get a new job. The film takes jabs at Wal-Mart (thinly disguised as Kostmart) and offers some clever moments like the family showering in a neighbor's sprinklers. All this is pleasant enough, but never anything more, a series of moments that should be heading toward something but never are. The same goes for Dick and Jane's initial desperate forays into armed robbery. But this material is better than what comes next, a harebrained revenge plot that is equal parts uninteresting and hard to follow.
 
  All is never completely lost with "Fun With Dick & Jane." Carrey and Leoni are gifted performers and work well off each other. Still, the film's overall frantic tone can't disguise the fact that the picture offers little delivery for all its buildup. Everyone involved with this production must have known there was a good movie somewhere, but no one's been quite able to find it.
 
 
'Fun With Dick & Jane'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for brief language, some sexual humor and occasional drug references
 
 Times guidelines:
 Less raunchy than most
 
 Released by Columbia Pictures. Director Dean Parisot. Producers Brian Grazer, Jim Carrey. Executive producers Peter Bart, Max Palevsky, Jane Bartelme.   

 The documentary "Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room" wrested only tragedy from the corporate scandal of its title, but it probably should come as no great surprise that now Hollywood is looking to mine big laughs from the same. Hence the sort-of-new Jim Carrey vehicle "Fun With Dick and Jane," what may be the first post-Enron comedy. Based on the 1977 Me Generation laugh-in of the same title with Jane Fonda and George Segal, this comic redo doesn't so much update the plight of its fast-sinking upwardly mobile couple as dust off the story's central conceit: namely, the flip side of the American dream is a nightmare but, you know, also kind of funny.  Set in and around Los Angeles, the film pivots on the plummeting fortunes of Dick and Jane Harper (Téa Leoni plays the missus), a happily married couple with a cute kid, a subdivision house stuffed with shiny consumer goods and a German import parked in the driveway. Jane works for a travel agency, though Dick brings home the big bucks from a company called Globodyne, which has something to do with consolidation and media properties but is really just an enormous Enron-like shell game. When the company goes up in shredded paper and smoke, and its chief operating villain, Jack McCallister (the invaluable Alec Baldwin), flies the coop in his helicopter, Dick's brand-new promotion to vice president, along with his family's financial safety net, goes bye-bye too.  It takes a few months for the full impact of Dick's unemployment to affect the family's status and rhythms. They don't plunge into poverty; they descend gradually, one indignity at a time. When the electricity is shut off, it's inconvenient but not a calamity: the housekeeper just stops vacuuming. It's more worrisome when Dick scrambles for one job with dozens of other identically suited and suitable applicants with the ferocity of an action hero. In the battleground of the executive unemployed, briefcases and empty water-cooler jugs are the weapons of choice, and a warrior like Dick isn't just jobless, but he is also on a rescue mission to save his family from doom or at least from poverty, which here mean more or less the same thing.  The fun in the film's title initially comes from watching comfortably middle-class people do without the usual buffers and privileges. This tacky, comic Schadenfreude works as long as the family's woes make for quirky gags, as when the three, soaped up and wearing bathing suits, shower under their neighbor's lawn sprinklers. But as the Harpers' fortunes continue to decline, the light tone darkens precipitously. By the time Jane mentions rising early to eat at the local soup kitchen, a pall has settled over the film. Mr. Carrey's and Ms. Leoni's sprightly performances can't obscure that the adversity endured by their characters mirrors some very real suffering. But before there's time to feel too bad, Dick and Jane pick up a couple of guns and start making like Bonnie and Clyde, ushering the proceedings into full-blown absurdism.  One of the film's insights is that poverty stinks, which could be news only in the la-la land of Los Angeles big-studio moviemaking. It's nonsense to expect social commentary from a high-concept comedy, especially one as self-congratulatory as this one (they care, they really, really care), but this is the rare studio comedy set in something like the real world. If the film never settles into a groove, zigging and zagging from belly laughs to pathos, it's because Enron remains raw as a wound. Too many cooks probably didn't help: directed by Dean Parisot, "Fun With Dick and Jane" has a screenplay credited to Judd Apatow and Nicholas Stoller, and, according to The Los Angeles Times, includes the efforts of David Koepp, Ed Solomon, Ted Griffin, Peter Tolan, Alec Berg, David Mandel and Jeff Schaffer.  Mr. Carrey's admirers may not mind the zigging and zagging, since he spends most of his screen time slaloming from one high jink to the next, really misting up with actorly sentiment only once. His spasmodic riff to the song "I Believe I Can Fly" is even better than the overexposed television advertisement suggests, while a tabletop freakout in a sepulchral club would work at twice the length. Mr. Carrey is such an attention hog that most actresses have a hard time holding on to their corner of the screen when he's onboard, especially in broader comedies. But Ms. Leoni never cedes her ground. Both performers exude such acute neediness - there's a touch of Jerry Lewis and Lucille Ball in their mutual frenzy - that not to love them even a little would seem cruel.  "Fun With Dick and Jane" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A gun is waved around a few times.

A screwball heist comedy for the Enron era, the new "Fun With Dick and Jane" gives the finger to scandal-ridden big businesses everywhere. Breezy, uneven update of the 1977 George Segal-Jane Fonda vehicle is the rare Hollywood remake that, by daring to reinterpret its source material within a fresh political context, actually has a reason to exist; the results, if not exactly subtle, are still fun enough to fend off any charges of titular false advertising. Fans of Jim Carrey in full-on manic mode should help Sony bank some B.O. during a competitive holiday frame.
Some might argue that by lambasting the giant corporations whose politically entrenched top dogs and fraudulent accounting practices have wreaked havoc on the American economy in recent years, pic is basically shooting fish in a barrel. True enough, but when the fish are this rotten, why complain?
Pointedly setting their story in the year 2000, pre-Enron, scribes Judd Apatow and Nicholas Stoller (who previously collaborated on TV's short-lived "Undeclared") imagine a cartoonishly exaggerated version of the doomed corporate behemoth in Globodyne, a company specializing in "fiber-optic content provision," among other things.
In the original, it took five minutes for aerospace engineer Dick Harper to get fired. Here, it takes almost half an hour for an entire company to go under, taking Dick (played by Carrey, who produced with Brian Grazer) with it. Within hours of being promoted to a top communications post, Dick is brought on TV to announce the company's earnings and explain why chief executive Jack McCallister (Alec Baldwin) has abruptly dumped his shares of Globodyne stock.
After an amusing scene of frantic document-shredding, during which the company's No. 2 (an effective Richard Jenkins) goes on a boozy expository rant about Globodyne's cooked books, Dick breaks the news to his wife Jane (Tea Leoni), who, as luck would have it, has just quit her job. With both spouses out of work, a son (Aaron Michael Drozin) to feed and a pile of ever-rising debt, it's not long before they're forced to sell off the Beemer and the plasma TV while the rest of their beautiful suburban abode is stripped bare.
While some scenes are lifted straight from the original (i.e. contractors showing up to repossess the lawn), the script adds another satirical layer by playfully sending up Dick, Jane and the greedy consumerist culture that produced them -- evident from the cookie-cutter houses lining their street as well as the neighbor who owns a voice-operated Mercedes. Pic also has fun with Dick's vain attempts to find a job amid cutthroat competition, which end with him working as a greeter at a Costco-like retailer.
But the crux of the story -- the fun, if you will -- is that Dick and Jane end up going the way of Bonnie and Clyde, staging a few clumsy convenience-store robberies before perfecting their methods and moving on to bigger fish. Pic essentially becomes a parade of costumes at this point, which is fine, as both Carrey and Leoni are adept at physical comedy and perfectly comfortable donning all manner of ridiculous outfits from one holdup to the next.
While Segal played Dick as an affable bumbler, Carrey imbues him with an anarchic, irrepressibly show-offy streak from the start, which makes the character's criminal progression both logical and weirdly sympathetic. Still, thesp is more or less playing himself here, and mileage will vary accordingly.
Leoni, however, is smooth and winning in a perf that ideally complements and sometimes even trumps Carrey's shenanigans. Baldwin is commandingly corrupt as the sleazy ex-CEO who becomes Dick and Jane's final target, hammering home the message that for sheer evil, petty theft has nothing on white-collar crime.
Helmer Dean Parisot ("Galaxy Quest") juggles the various genre elements with a light but supple touch; even when the jokes don't work, pic never overstays its welcome, clocking in at five minutes shorter than the original. Impudent political humor reaches its arguable nadir during the end credits, which extend a special thank-you to top executives from the likes of Enron, Worldcom, Arthur Andersen, Adelphia, Cendant and too many others.

Have enough news cycles now passed for the Enron  debacle to be funny? Probably not to anyone whose "retirement" will be spent greeting shoppers at the local low-price emporium, and certainly not to that company's dazed, pocket-picked employees and shareholders. But with his toothless remake of 1977's Fun With Dick and Jane , moneybags producer Brian Grazer —whose shit-into-gold touch makes him as immune to financial insecurity as he is to cinematic relevance—is gambling that the rest of us will find the last half-decade of corporate malfeasance a real scream. Who says Hollywood  is out of touch with mainstream America?
Dick & Jane  stars Jim Carrey  as Dick Harper, a self-satisfied, upwardly mobile marcom shill for a '90s-style media conglomerate who's promoted to VP shortly before the firm collapses. The stereotypical trappings of Dick's success—generic McMansion, spanking-new BMW , Latina domestic—are thus put in jeopardy, and he and his wife, Jane (Teá Leoni ), subsequently embark on a series of unfunny vignettes in which frugality, menial labor, illegal immigration, petty crime, and yes, Wal-Mart  serve as the butt of jokes. To no one's surprise the couple gets everything back, with some newfound humility to boot.
Director Dean Parisot , who exhibits little in the way of visual imagination but at least showed a flair for broad humor in 1999's Galaxy Quest  , seems undermotivated by Judd Apatow  and Nicholas Stoller 's rushed, flaccid screenplay. It's one thing to milk humor and pathos from a Star Trek   send-up, though, and quite another to make sudden destitution hilarious without seeming like a jerk. Ted Kotcheff  couldn't pull it off in the original Dick and Jane , either, but he had two charismatic leads (George Segal  and Jane Fonda ) with chemistry. Parisot has Carrey, whose obsessive mugging subverts any attempt at anything but the most manic tone, a checked-out Leoni, and Alec Baldwin  unconvincingly channeling Ken Lay  and Dubya as a corrupt CEO. Plus, he's stuck with this story in the age of Bush, whose sympathies lie with the Ken Lays of the world; slapstick might have been the perfect vehicle to expose middle-class myopia 30 years ago, but these days only the blackest of farces will do. This Dick & Jane  is precisely the kind of social-problem comedy you'd expect from well-intentioned millionaires unaccustomed to putting their money where their mouths are.
