 The heroes and villains in "The Future of Food," Deborah Koons Garcia's sober, far-reaching polemic against genetically modified foods, are clearly identified. The good guys, acknowledged in the film's cursory final segment, are organic farmers along with a growing network of farmers' markets around the United States that constitute a grass-roots resistance to the Goliath of agribusiness and the genetically engineered products it favors.  The bad guys, to whom this quietly inflammatory film devotes the bulk of its attention, are large corporations, especially the Monsanto Company, a pioneer in the development of genetically engineered agricultural products. In recent years, Monsanto has patented seeds that yield crops whose chemical structures have been modified to ward off pests.  The film poses many ticklish ethical and scientific questions:  • Since genetic material is life, should corporations have the right to patent genes?  • What are the long-term effects on humans of consuming genetically engineered food, which is still largely unlabeled in the United States?  • Can the crossbreeding of wild and genetically modified plants be controlled?  • Might genetically engineered food be the answer to world hunger?  • And finally, could the reduction of biodiversity, which  has quickened since the introduction of genetically modified plants, lead to catastrophe?  The film's answers to these five questions are: No. Possibly damaging. Probably not. Probably not. Possibly.  In each case, the movie outlines the pluses, the minuses and the imponderables. But the overall attitude of Ms. Garcia, the widow of the Grateful Dead guitarist Jerry Garcia, might be summed up with the scolding slogan "It's not nice to fool Mother Nature."  Much of the film is devoted to Monsanto's prosecution of Canadian farmers on whose property the company discovered traces of its patented Roundup Ready canola seed, which is genetically engineered to kill pests. Though the seed had drifted accidentally onto the farmers' land, courts ruled that they had violated Monsanto's patent and were liable for damages.  The film begins with a capsule history of agriculture going back more than 12,000 years but concentrating on the 20th century. It traces the development of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, the rise and fall of the green revolution, its morphing into the gene revolution, and the implanting of natural bacterial toxins into the cells of corn. Can wheat be far behind?  In the mid-1990's, Monsanto, the DuPont Company and others bought the seed industry. Monsanto alone spent $8 billion investing in the notion that, as the film bluntly puts it, "whoever controls the seeds controls the food."  Monsanto has even developed a "suicide seed" that makes crops kill themselves after one planting. What might happen, the film wonders, if this seed mixed with wild seeds?  The movie wags its finger at the hand-in-hand relationship of multinational corporations and big government. One of the film's more unsettling revelations is its identification of the connections between Monsanto and top government officials who have been board members, consultants and executives for its subsidiaries. As a result, the movie insinuates, the government has little interest in underwriting research into the promotion of biodiversity and other alternatives to the economic goals of agribusiness.  The movie ends on a tentative upbeat note. It visits farmers' markets where the organically grown tomatoes look so inviting you want to pluck them off the screen and slice them into your own scrumptious B.L.T. We see whole-earth-style advocates carrying signs that read, "Our children are not lab rats." Goliath, we are assured, still has a way to go before trampling all the Davids armed with slingshots.

What author Murray Bookchin once termed "our synthetic environment" becomes more than an abstract phrase in "The Future of Food." Docu is a disturbing -- if somewhat bland and partisan -- study of agribusiness' aggressive push for genetically-modified food. Genetically-modified (or GM) fruits and vegetables are a topic of raging debate in scientific and ecological circles, so it's a shame writer-director Deborah Koons Garcia opts to show only one side of the argument. Pic's a rallying cry for organic and slow-food fans everywhere and will find its biggest aud in public interest tube play and activist vid circulation.
Shrewdly, Garcia and her crack researchers immediately point to the rampant failure of "The Green Revolution" project to promote Third World agriculture harvests as an example of how top-down, industrial strategies of food production can often do more harm than good.
Pic wastes no time pointing a giant green finger at the main corporate culprit behind the recent GM push -- chemical giant Monsanto. Docu alleges Monsanto devised weed killer Round-Up and then developed seeds that could only grow with the use of Round-Up and other Monsanto-designed pesticides.
In addition, Monsanto is shown bullying farmers, such as Canadian seed developer Percy Schmeiser, by suing them for illegal use of their pesticide products -- when the pesticides actually drifted accidentally onto the farmers' land. This, along with the larger ongoing move by biotech firms to patent GM organisms (in effect, patenting life forms) marks the most potentially widespread control of food and land use by a few corporations in history.
Admirers of "The Corporation" will recognize many arguments and examples set forth here. But while that docu provided a debate as well as a stinging critique in inventive style, Garcia's pic is plain wrap filmmaking that's single minded, capped with a pitch for organic eating that's much too weak.
Camera (color), John Chater; editor, Vivien Hillgrove; music, Todd Boekelheide; sound, Ray Day, Doug Dunderdale; supervising sound editor, Lora Hirschberg; research, Catherine Lynn Butler, Sara Needham, Sara E. Maamouri; associate producers, Molly Jones, Maamouri, Needham. Reviewed on videotape, Los Angeles, Dec. 31, 2004. (In Mill Valley Film Festival.) Running time: 91 MIN.
 


The Future of Food , Deborah Koons Garcia 's learned and persuasive essay about the perils of genetically modified (GM) foods, is a rarity—a muckraking exposé that attempts to raise the level of public debate through responsible research and sober rhetoric. Garcia is no less a passionate left-wing partisan than her counterparts, but in chronicling a slew of gross injustices perpetrated by Monsanto  et al., she wisely eschews standard anti-corporate bombast for measured tones. While promising bounty for all, the same agricultural conglomerates that produced drought- and disease-resistant crops through DNA manipulation were litigating family farmers into bankruptcy and suppressing anti-GM university research. Most shocking of all is the revelation that, with FDA  approval (and without public warning), GM ingredients have worked their way into many packaged foods—this, despite an untold number of potentially adverse health effects. Though Garcia's aesthetic does tend toward the maudlin (she pits the stark majesty of community farmlands against nightmarish agribusiness biohazard suits), in exposing how the safety of our food supply is threatened by corporate consolidation, The Future of Food  is a worthy veggie side dish to the carnivorous Fast Food Nation .
