The factors that won Games of Love and Chance  France's 2005 César award as Best Picture may not have been entirely cinematic, but they're valid nonetheless. Abdellatif Kechiche's gritty, improvisatory-style drama about teenagers rehearsing a school play is set in a rough Paris housing project; those actors are all project residents, most of them from Muslim families of North African descent. They swear on the Koran, and they also bicker viciously over universal stuff like who's stealing whose boyfriend. The vérité fascinates, even if the artifice is obvious.

 Abdellatif Kechiche's first film, about a young North African immigrant's adventures in Paris, was called "It's Voltaire's Fault." His second, "Games of Love and Chance" (known in France as "L'Esquive"), takes place in the drab high-rise Paris suburbs (called banlieues) where many North Africans live. Its English title, and much of its inspiration, comes from a play by Voltaire's contemporary the 18th-century French writer Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux. Mr. Kechiche's interest in connecting France's classical literary heritage with its contemporary social reality is intriguing, and it has resulted, in this case, in a spirited and insightful comedy of manners.  That is not the genre usually associated with the banlieue setting, typically the backdrop for grim exercises in realist melodrama. Mr. Kechiche's naturalistic, almost documentary style certainly does not relieve the ugliness of the housing projects, and a late confrontation between some of the characters and the local police temporarily jolts the picture from its youthful reverie. But for the most part "Games of Love and Chance," a hit in France and the winner of several César awards, is a graceful and sympathetic look at how the lives of teenagers intersect with a work of literature. Its script, which Mr. Kechiche wrote with Ghalya Lacroix, choreographs a dizzying series of collisions between the hip-hop influenced, Arabic-inflected staccato of working-class youth slang and the decorous melodies of Marivaux's prose.  The story is deceptively simple. Krimo (Osman Elkharraz), a shy, sweet 15-year-old, has a crush on Lydia (Sara Forestier), who is as outgoing and theatrical as he is quiet and reserved. Nonetheless, he takes on the male lead in a school production of Marivaux's play, which he seems to hope might serve as the script to his own seduction of Lydia, who is playing the female lead. Krimo's protective cousin, Nanou (Nanou Benhamou), does not approve, and a complicated series of games ensues, as the reversals and obstructions of Marivaux's comic plot are filtered through the confused mores and conflicting desires of various girls and boys.  That adults figure only tangentially in this world makes it seem both risky and enchanted. There are times when the possibility of violence and real pain hovers like a cloud, and others when the air sparkles the silly, self-serious impetuosity of adolescence. Mr. Kechiche shows remarkable sympathy for his young cast and takes them seriously enough to keep "Games of Love and Chance" free of any hint of mockery or condescension.
Past and present ferociously head butt each other in Games of Love and Chance  (L'Esquive ), a French drama in which an insult like "Fuck you, you fuckin' faggot motherfucker!" reverberates with classical subtext. Congregating in the hallways and courtyards of a Paris housing project, groups of teens engage in rapid street talk, piling on profanities with cavalier abandon. United in vulgarity, they're also bonded by an unlikely academic endeavor—the mounting of a class play by the 18th-century dramatist Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux, an altogether different kind of wordsmith whose verse must seem as foreign to them as the Eiffel Tower  or the Louvre .
In the Marivaux comedy from which the movie takes its English title, the identity-swapping characters discover that they can't escape their class-determined destinies. The movie poses a parallel predicament: Can great literature lift these banlieue  adolescents out of their dreary surroundings? The most enthusiastic taker is Lydia (an excellent Sara Forestier ), a bossy beauty who's playing the lead in the school production and who dispenses much unsolicited direction during rehearsals. Her most faithful friend is Krimo (Osman Elkharraz ), a monosyllabic underachiever who tentatively essays the role of Lydia's secret admirer both onstage and off.
If Marivaux's characters communicate in microsurgical badinage, the verbal exchanges in Kechiche's film register more like sledgehammers on reinforced concrete. Krimo's jealous ex accosts the unsuspecting Lydia with a magnificent string of epithets, threatening to "waste you, you motherfuckin' 'ho!" (The movie is either a subtitler's dream or worst nightmare.) Even Lydia's own "homey" Frida (an unleashed Sabrina Ouazani ) takes frequent verbal swings at her buddy, blasting her romantic indecision and haughty pride. For all of Lydia's take-charge attitude onstage, she finds herself on the defensive when it comes to everything else. Her dilemma is embodied by the movie's French title, L'Esquive , a fencing term for dodging that foretells the feats of evasion she must perform whenever libidos flare.
Unlike American counterparts Kids  or Dangerous Minds , this highly intelligent comedy (which cleaned up at this year's Césars) doesn't seek to shock or inspire, but merely documents teen moodiness in all its tedious unpredictability. It also avoids making big political statements, seldom drawing attention to the ethnicity of its cast, who are mostly of Arab, African, and Asian descent. Echoing Marivaux's own obsession with the subtleties of the human visage, Abdellatif Kechiche's DV camera indulges in tight close-ups that scrutinize every facial nuance with nonjudgmental fascination.
Games of Love and Chance  is ultimately about the power of words, particularly their ability to fail us. Krimo's stage debut collapses when his Esther Kahn–worthy line readings inspire laughter from his peers. More ominously, a climactic act of police brutality crushes all attempts at calm, verbal reasoning from the young protagonists. Let down by language, these kids have every right to be angry and profane. Life isn't winsome drama after all, but a procession of petty and depressing moments that grow increasingly difficult to endure. Reading between the cuss words, the movie glimpses a sunny teen innocence just before it darkens irreversibly into adulthood.
