 Recovery time is recommended after seeing “Gardens of the Night,” a harrowing, obliquely told story of kidnapping and forced child prostitution that conjures a world entirely populated by predators and prey. Written and directed by Damian Harris (“Deceived,” “Bad Company”), who researched the subject for a decade, “Gardens of the Night” has a ghastly air of authenticity.  The movie’s first and better half portrays events as seen through the eyes of a frightened little girl who doesn’t really know what is happening, which makes it all the more sinister. In these scenes “Gardens of the Night” taps into childhood memories of straining to understand the mysterious ways of the grown-up world when things go wrong.  After the blond, pretty,  8-year-old Leslie Whitehead (Ryan Simpkins) is cajoled into a car on her way to school in Wilmington, Pa., she is shuttled from one hideout to another by kidnappers who convince her that her parents don’t want her anymore. One piece of proof is a bogus cellphone number she is free to dial, which her abductor Alex (Tom Arnold) tells her is her father’s. After weeks go by and no one answers, she crumples up the paper on which he scrawled the number and gives up hope.  Mr. Arnold is frighteningly believable as an obsequious child pornographer with a hearty, hale-fellow manner who loves his victims in a sick, diabolical way. He wins Leslie’s trust by enlisting her help in finding a lost dog and gives her a ride to school. The next day he reappears and spirits her away.  All we know of Alex is what Leslie observes. Overweight and sweaty, bellowing through a stopped-up nose but unflappably cheerful and solicitous, he insists he is her protector, though she soon realizes he is not. Alex, who has a sullen, hothead sidekick, Frank (Kevin  Zegers), wheels and deals with a distributor of child pornography (Jeremy Sisto).  (None of  the pornography is seen in the film or is shown being made.)  Once in Alex’s thrall, Leslie shares quarters with Donnie (Jermaine Scooter Smith), a fellow kidnap victim who becomes her only friend. As she reads aloud from “The Jungle Book,” they find temporary solace in an imaginary animal kingdom.  In one creepy scene Leslie is pimped out to a judge (Raynold Gideon), whose wife (Cornelia Guest) shepherds her into an upstairs room where she silently waits for the unknown with three other girls, all wearing numbed expressions. In the ugliest scene Leslie is taken to a motel room where a sweet-talking john (Harold Perrineau) cajoles her into letting him touch her, then turns violent when she resists.  As she is about to be brutally raped, Alex bursts into the room with a gun. Left uncertain is whether the scene was an assignation gone amok, or was staged as part of Alex’s brainwashing program.  “Gardens of the Night” loses much of its power when it leaps ahead nine years to find Leslie and Donnie (now played by Gillian Jacobs and Evan Ross) working the streets of San Diego as homeless teenage prostitutes who sleep on the beach and under bridges. As the soundtrack changes from music-box delicate to hard-edged punk, the movie becomes a sad but conventional study of throwaway street kids. What happened to them in the intervening years is left to the imagination. Neither Ms. Jacobs nor Mr. Ross infuses their characters with much personality beyond projecting a ravaged numbness.  “Gardens of the Night” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity, sexual situations and one scene of violence.

It's a sign something's not quite working when the statistics in a film's closing credits about child abductions, underage prostitution and kiddie porn prove more disturbing than the fictionalized story that precedes them. So it goes with "Gardens of the Night," Brit writer-helmer Damian Harris' well-meaning but underachieving drama that shows how a girl abducted at 8 years old and forced into prostitution becomes a dead-eyed streetwalker at 17. Low-budget downer features strong perfs, especially from the younger cast and Tom Arnold, but cliches undermine its effectiveness. "Gardens" will best flourish at further fests and through niche distribution.
Opening with an off-the-peg screenwriting maneuver, the action begins with homeless teen prostitute Leslie (Gillian Jacobs, "Choke") spinning a tale to a youth-shelter worker (John Malkovich) about how she went into the care of an "uncle" after her parents supposedly died when she was a preteen.
In fact, an extended flashback shows she was abducted off the streets of Wilmington, Pa., by sleazoids Alex (Arnold, playing off his genial persona in a piece of genius casting) and Frank (Kevin Zegers, "Transamerica"). Locked in a squalid suburban room, young Leslie (Ryan Simpkins, excellent) and Donnie (Jermaine "Scooter" Smith), a black boy about her age, are repeatedly drugged and forced to make porn movies with Alex and Frank.
Later, she and Donnie are pimped out to clients by Jimmy (Jeremy Sisto), who, like Alex, claims he's not interested in abusing children himself. A subsequent flashback suggests Alex at least is lying, a spot-on detail that illustrates writer-helmer Harris' research into pimp psychology (Harris spent 10 years interviewing victims, their parents and perpetrators in preparation for filming.).
The fact that Harris (who helmed "The Rachel Papers" and lesbo-shocker "Mercy") gets such details right makes it all the more frustrating when the film missteps with trite motifs such as bathtub scenes, cutaway shots of clenched little hands and children's drawings that overmilk the drama, as well as an oh-so-ironic voiceover of young Leslie reading Kipling's "The Jungle Book."
Nevertheless, awareness that this monstrous cruelty really happens adds a powerful urgency. While, thankfully for the sake of the young thesps, no actual abuse is shown, a knockout scene where Leslie is almost raped by her first client (Harold Perrineau) condenses all the horror the story needs. Arguably more chilling are the scenes where Alex, speaking with a gentle parental voice, strokes Leslie's hair, likening the pain she's going through (i.e., becoming a whore) to that of a caterpillar becoming a butterfly.
Second half of the film, which follows the now-grown Leslie and Donnie (Evan Ross) around the red-light zones and drug dens of San Diego, lacks the same impact, although, again, the milieu evoked has the right ring of veracity. Well-chosen non-source soundtrack choices by neo-punk and indie bands such as Neurosis, San Diego locals Gogogo Airheart and indie-movie favorites Broken Social Scene add punch.
Lead Jacobs is good enough to create empathy for the colder, teenage Leslie, but unfortunately looks about five years too old for the part and is way too well-groomed and clear-complexioned to make a convincing smackhead. It's Arnold who steals the show.
Elsewhere, craft contributions are slickly pro, with nubbly, multitextured lensing on digital and Super 8 by Paula Huidobro and canny sound design by Ryan Kaiser repping standout elements.
Pic may have trouble getting distribution in Blighty, given its parallels with the headline story of missing English 4-year-old Madeleine McCann, which has already backburned release of the similarly themed "Gone Baby Gone."
Camera (color, DV-to-35mm, 8mm-to-35mm), Paula Huidobro; editor, Michael Shemesh; music, Craig Richey; music supervisor, Peymon Maskan; production designer, Bradd Fillmann; costume designer, Rhona Meyers; sound (Dolby Digital/DTS), Shaun Cunningham; sound designer, Ryan Kaiser; assistant director, Aaron Steele; casting, Shannon Makhanian. (Reviewed at the Berlin Film Festival -- competing), Feb. 9, 2008. Running time: 108 MIN.
 


The title is the first sign that the audience is in for it. The second is a child's voice reading from The Jungle Book , and the third is the voice of a counselor (John Malkovich ) comforting the pretty young thing sitting before him. From there, we are treated to a dubiously long "Stranger Danger" sketch that pushes way beyond the limits of taste and reason: All dripping faucets, dulcet piano tinkling, blinking lightbulbs, fairy-tale allusions, and Tom Arnold  whispering sweet nothings, Gardens of the Night  poeticizes the horror of young Leslie (Ryan Simpkins ) being kidnapped and passed around like a rag doll, along with her surrogate brother Donnie (Jermaine Smith ), in a not-so-surreptitious child pornography ring that includes creeps played by B-listers Harold Perrineau  and Jeremy Sisto . Pitched at the risible level of Marco Kreuzpaintner 's Trade , the film never quite recovers from writer-director Damian Harris 's dithering way of shooting things. Back in the present, the subject is the way the abused become abusers, and how the bond between the older Leslie (Gillian Jacobs ) and Donnie (Evan Ross ) is tested on the streets—but after being built on such a shoddy foundation, their current-day reality registers only as an afterthought.
