If anything, it was wilder than you thought. A dozen or so witnesses testify, with a lusty nostalgia that shades into older-and-wiser gravity, to the glories and perils of anonymous gay sex during the one decade when people didn't feel guilty about it. The era that ended in 1981, with the onslaught of AIDS, is recalled, variously, as a utopian orgy; a rare time of communal connection; and the most extreme bacchanalia since the fall of Rome. In Gay Sex in the 70s  we hear tales of young men groping their way through spaces so dark they couldn't see their partners, of hookups spurred by a smile on the street. The director, Joseph Lovett, wants us to ask if there's such a thing as too much freedom, and he has the sobriety to say yes — and no.


Magnificent photographs, archival news footage, and location-shot porn add texture and immediacy to Joseph Lovett's fascinating memoir of the sexually explosive 12-year period (1969-1981) between Stonewall -- when gays at lower Manhattan's Stonewall Bar made history by standing up to the New York City police -- and the onset of AIDS. For the handful of gay men whose nostalgic recollections are interwoven here, those years were as liberating and intense as they were brief. Vivid portrait of a fabled libertine lost paradise should cruise the general fest circuit before finding a late-night home on gay-friendly cable outlets. 
Interviews with activists, artists, writers, photographers and raconteurs of all persuasions lay out the topography of gay life in New York during this fondly remembered period when, virtually overnight, homosexuality went from fearful secret to paraded pride. Gay sexuality took to the streets and opportunity beckoned from every doorway, often literally. At the low end of the scale was the meat packing district, offering casual lunchtime pickups, and more dangerous anonymity in the backs of darkened semis at night. Abandoned piers on the Hudson River became an alternative community: Lovett's camera pans across huge blown-up photos of the piers to reveal hidden pockets of activity in every inch of the frame.
More traditionally, behind nearly every bush on The Rambles in Central Park, men made love without fear of police or of gay-bashing civilians while dancehalls like the Loft, the Paradise Garage and Studio 54 encouraged gays to strut their stuff. Full-service bathhouses like the legendary St. Marks Baths furnished everything from steam rooms to high-class professional entertainment by fag hag extraordinaire
 Bette Midler, strewing poppers like flower petals in her wake.
But the true endemic Gotham community was Fire Island, recalled here with a reverence bordering on awe.
Paradoxically, all the interviewees, including filmmaker Lovett himself, speak of this era of mad promiscuity as a time of friendship and community. When AIDS enters the picture, Lovett's expert control of tone and structure really pays off.
On camera, Lovett muses about a party he went to where all the men he had ever lusted after were gathered in the same room. He was all ready to partake of his first orgy when his lover forced him to leave. He now realizes that he and his lover are probably the only ones of those partygoers still alive.
Tech credits are fine, music choices particularly inspired.
Camera (color, HD), Lovett, Michael Sean Kaminsky; editor, Jason Szabo; music, Art Labriola; sound, Lovett, Kaminsky. Reviewed on videocassette at NewFest, New York, June 9, 2005. (Also in Tribeca Film Festival.) Running time: 70 MIN.

 


A low-budget talking-headster about man-on-man action in the years between Stonewall and AIDS, Gay Sex in the 70s  is lightly entertaining, but—not unlike the cheap action it chronicles—leaves one wanting something much more substantial. The story is told through interviews with a handful of New Yorkers who experienced the decade, divided into chapters on the various venues for anonymous trysts: bathhouses, discos, the rickety piers, and even the cabins of empty trucks parked on West Side lots. Practically all of New York City, says one fellow, "was a constant cruising opportunity." A few factoids stand out: memories of a pushcart man who sold KY, coffee, and tissues outside the fuck trucks; reports that even VD clinic waiting rooms became cruising areas; a television ad for Man's Country bathhouse that promises, "Visit us once and you'll come again and again." But overall this earnest product falls in line with the celebratory doc fare often found at gay film festivals: sub-TV production values, middling archival footage, and a hesitancy to separate history from nostalgia in the course of enshrining the first-person record.
