"G-Force’’ represents an inconceivably tragic waste of a brilliant idea. Frankly, if you can’t squeeze a decent movie out of talking 3-D superagent guinea pigs  - complete with itty-bitty night-vision goggles and jet-propelled grappling hooks  - you may as well throw in the towel and consider a career in insurance.
Yes, I’m talking to you, producer Jerry Bruckheimer, director Hoyt Yeatman, writers Cormac and Marianne Wibberley and the other four (at least) uncredited writers. “G-Force’’ looks great, moves fast, and will amuse kids under 8 or so, although it’d help if they already had a sugar buzz on. For anyone else, the goofy high concept quickly gives way to standard family flick fart gags, boilerplate writing, and soggy moralizing. It’s a Disney co-production, but it’s obvious no one walked down the hall to consult Pixar
.
The first few scenes do get your hopes up. Who wouldn’t get a horselaugh from the sight of Zach Galifianakis, the wild child of “The Hangover,’’ as an FBI handler soberly discussing mission strategy with a digitally animated Cavia porcellus? The cast is high-end for this sort of thing: Sam Rockwell provides the voice of team leader Darwin  - a sort of Tom Cruise of guinea pigs  - and Penelope Cruz and Tracy Morgan are on hand as his colleagues in action, Juarez and Blaster. The great British character actor Bill Nighy plays the human villain, an international appliance titan with visions of world domination.
The voice of Speckles, a star-nosed mole who’s the team’s technical guru, turns out to be Nicolas Cage, recycling his adenoidal whine from “Peggy Sue Got Married.’’ Once the G-Force has its funding revoked by a meanie FBI overseer (Will Arnett) and the characters have to hit the pavement, they encounter a pet-shop guinea pig  - a guinea porker, really  - voiced by Jon Favreau. His cage-mate is the funniest character in the movie, a weaselly little hamster played by Brooklyn’s finest motormouth, Steve Buscemi.
(Here’s a game I play, by the way: When actors I generally respect show up in one of these silly summer behemoths, I always wonder if they have college-age kids. You’d be surprised how often they do. Buscemi does, and tuition isn’t getting any cheaper.)
The problem with “G-Force’’ is that its creativity, and thus its entertainment value, doesn’t extend an inch beyond the initial idea. The story line is a mishmash of every “Mission: Impossible’’ cliché in the playbook, and once the novelty of seeing them acted out by tiny furry hyperrealistic cartoon characters wears off, it’s like watching a Xerox
 of a Xerox.
This despite the usual Bruckheimer indulgences: high-speed chase scenes, random explosions, flatulence. The script, which feels committeed to death, has a little bit of everything, including a “Transformers’’ rip-off sequence and many occasions for the urban slang Morgan mangles so smartly on “30 Rock.’’ Here it just sounds like pandering. Director Yeatman, making his feature debut after a successful career as a visual effects expert, busies himself with the digital rendering (which is very well done) and as many in-your-face 3-D shots as he can muster. “G-Force’’ is the opposite of Pixar’s “Up’’ in this regard; if it’s not comin’ at ya, it’s not worthy of our attention.
Despite this, the movie’s an enervating experience. You can take the whole family; I did. We all found ourselves dozing off at points, snapping back to attention only during the enjoyably dippy dance-happy end credits. And this from a clan predisposed to like any and all movies featuring talking rodents. The general consensus on this one: Rats.
.

A family-friendly adventure about animated guinea pigs working as top-secret spies for the U.S. government, shot in Disney 3D and voiced by big-time stars including Nicolas Cage and Penelope Cruz, ought to be funny and kind of cute, right? Would you settle for frantic and loud, with a few lame jokes inserted pertaining to Cruz's Spanish accent? The first 3-D film produced by Jerry Bruckheimer turns out to be similar to 2-D projects from the same noise-making producer—heavy on action scenes and heavy, too, on message: Everyone is special, family is important, and smashed-up stuff looks cool.


 “G-Force” — perhaps the most expensive 3-D house-pet action movie ever made and, I’m willing to concede, probably one of the best — is about an hour shorter than “Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen,” half as pretentious and twice as witty. Call this faint praise, if you like. “G-Force,” as loud and enervating as the words “A Jerry Bruckheimer Production” might lead you to expect, can hardly be accused of modesty, but on the other hand no film full of talking guinea pigs would be so rash as to attempt the kind of lumbering gravitas that Michael Bay has seen fit to bestow on a bunch of toys.  The thundering, clanking climax, in which blenders, coffee makers and other appliances turn angry and amalgamate into robotic, apocalyptic threats to civilization as we know it, almost seems like a critique of “Transformers.” Or maybe “critique” is the wrong word. Kids like big, noisy, destructive metal robots. They also like furry little rodents who speak in the voices of Sam Rockwell and Penélope Cruz (especially all those 10-year-olds who dug “Choke” and “Vicky Cristina Barcelona”). So if you make a movie that has both robots and rodents, plus a bunch of swaggering catch phrases, a couple of flatulence jokes and a bunch of human actors hopping around pretending to interact with the computer-generated rodents — well, the pitch makes itself, doesn’t it?  That seems to be the thinking — again, maybe not the right word — behind “G-Force,” which manages to be fairly entertaining in that exhausting, rackety, late-summer-kiddie-movie way. Mr. Rockwell and Ms. Cruz are joined by Tracy Morgan and Nicolas Cage, his voice almost unrecognizable, playing a mole named Speckles. The other three are guinea pigs, and this foursome is part of an off-the-books experiment run by a renegade government nerd played by Zach Galifianakis. The animals are trying to stop a diabolical scheme involving a consumer-electronics mogul (Bill Nighy) while being pursued by F.B.I. guys who want to shut them down.  That will do for plot summary. Other animals include a dumb, neurotic guinea pig (Jon Favreau) and a clever, neurotic hamster (Steve Buscemi). The 3-D application (available in some theaters) has the odd effect of making the animated critters look warmer and more real than the actual people, and it must be said that some of the action sequences are impressively executed and edited. One of the best is a fairly simple gag in which two guinea pigs go rocketing down a suburban street in an old tire. I mean simple as a visual conceit, since a great deal of effort and ingenuity must have been expended in putting this amusing little sequence together.  And far be it from me to suggest that some of that work, and the money behind it, might have been spent on a better script, or a different movie. “G-Force,” directed by Hoyt Yeatman, lives up to its promise to provide nearly an hour and a half of semicrude jokes and big effects, pausing for an obligatory scene of heartfelt lesson learning, in which the guinea pigs are encouraged to believe in themselves. Fine. It can’t hurt.  But perhaps — getting back to that final showdown between the pets and the raging appliances — there is a deeper message in this film. Maybe it’s a parable about the power of technology, which as we all know can be harnessed for good or for evil. That is, you can build something that will threaten civilization as we know it, or you can make a 3-D action movie about guinea pigs. Or maybe what this film proves is that you can do both.  “G-Force” is rated PG (Parental Guidance suggested). It has some intense action scenes and mildly naughty humor.

A fur-covered "A-Team" for the kiddies, "G-Force" is heavy on splashy pyrotechnics and predictably light on plot. No matter: This 3-D action-comedy about guinea pigs as secret agents was engineered in producer Jerry Bruckheimer's nearly foolproof laboratory. Disney's spot-on marketing campaign has spawned a huge must-see factor among grade schoolers; boys will be enticed by the pic's vaunted thrills, and girls by the adorably realistic furballs. While adults will probably find something lacking, "G-Force" should fast-pedal its way to a thunderously successful opening, ultimately doing for fuzzy rodents what "Beverly Hills Chihuahua" did for small canines.
"G-Force" is only the latest iteration of Hollywood's current infatuation with cute CG rodents. In the past year alone, they've gnawed the scenery in "Bolt," "Bedtime Stories," "The Tale of Despereaux" and even "Chihuahua." But "G-Force" takes things to a new level. Here the guinea pigs must save civilization from a dastardly appliance czar aiming for nothing less than global domination.
If the script (from the husband-and-wife writing team the Wibberleys) had fleshed out that concept and managed to sustain a more charismatic villain, the film might have yielded a more compelling conflict than that of skilled heroes fighting an amorphous evil. Longtime visual effects supervisor Hoyt Yeatman Jr., in his feature directing debut, displays ample credentials for action and memorable setpieces.
And the cast is a tyro helmer's dream: Zach Galifianakis, fresh off his "Hangover," plays scientific genius (and kindly animal rescuer) Dr. Ben Kendall. Along with his girlfriend, veterinarian Marcie (Kelli Garner), Ben oversees a special team of trained animal operatives. There's Mooch, a fly that transmits video data; guinea pigs Darwin (voiced by Sam Rockwell), Juarez (Penelope Cruz) and Blaster (Tracy Morgan); and a star-nosed mole (Nicolas Cage) specializing in computers. But the FBI has threatened to cut back on funding his work unless Ben can convince the agency otherwise.
So, in a speedy opening sequence that's little more than a showcase for some breathlessly paced action and dazzling visuals (effects include holography and CG stunts), the G-Force infiltrates the estate of suspicious coffeemaker king Leonard Saber (Bill Nighy) during a presentation on future technology. Stumbling on the entrepreneur's apparent plans to eradicate civilization via computer virus ("Operation Clusterstorm") -- in fact, Saber's motives are never really clarified -- Darwin copies the data onto a PDA and, aided by his fellow agents, narrowly escapes by a hair. Back at headquarters, the PDA yields nothing.
When the FBI administrators, led by persnickety Agent Kip Killian (an underused Will Arnett), get wind of the botched infiltration, they close Ben's office and announce their intention to impound the animals. Having considered just this possibility, Ben and Marcie release the gang into civilian life, where they'll go "undercover" as ordinary critters, residing in a pet shop until they can resume their work.
The pet-shop sequence and its aftermath are among "G-Force's" funniest and most entertaining scenes. Forced to room with a tubby, overeager guinea pig named Hurley (voiced by Jon Favreau) and a seed-hoarding hamster (Steve Buscemi), the gang face foes of the more pedestrian variety. After a little girl (Piper Mackenzie Harris) and her older brother (Tyler Patrick Jones) adopt Juarez and Blaster, the rodents have to contend with overly aggressive kids whose agenda includes forcing them into battery-operated trucks and hot-pink nail polish. A delightfully rambunctious escape sequence will score big with little ones, as will a clever variation on the hamster-wheel concept.
But by the time the rodents are careening in their rapid-deployment vehicles through a fairgrounds as fireworks ignite, a more cerebral viewer might wonder if "G-Force" was designed to do anything other than deliver a high-octane thrill ride with eye-popping visuals and cuddly creatures; the plot feels squarely like an afterthought.
Nevertheless, the pic's technical aspects are beyond reproof; it moves at a rapid clip, and there are enough inside jokes for action fans to elicit laughs from adults. One choice morsel: Dueling with an espresso machine gone amok, Darwin yells out, "Yippie-ki-yay, coffeemaker."
