 The white lab rats shown struggling for survival in a fish tank in the opening scene of Matt Aselton’s debut film, “Gigantic,” are more than metaphors for the timid, flailing characters in this serious comedy about the children of privilege. Their presence also suggests Mr. Aselton’s approach to the world, which he examines with the evenhanded curiosity of a scientist studying a species under stress.  I use the term comedy advisedly, since the mood of this cautiously surreal, absurdist movie is predominantly glum. Much of the time its 28-year-old protagonist, Brian Weathersby (Paul Dano), who works as a sales clerk for an upscale Manhattan mattress company, wears a slightly stricken expression on his otherwise poker face. Mr. Dano’s low-key performance types Brian as a close spiritual relative of the polite young men who drift through mumblecore films.  Periodically Brian is stalked by a homeless man, who attacks him with a lead pipe in one scene and in another shoots him during a hunting expedition.  This angry would-be assassin is a figment of Brian’s imagination, yet his assaults leave Brian visibly wounded, which reflects Mr. Aselton’s assertion in his director’s statement that he is “interested in stories in which reality and absurdity cross.”  Brian’s main goal in life is to adopt a Chinese baby, and he has applied to an agency to help him find one. Adoptive single parenthood seems to be his conscious attempt to give his directionless life a foundation. His two older brothers, a surgeon (Robert Stanton) and an unscrupulous oilman (Ian Roberts), are old-school go-getters like his overbearing father (Ed Asner).  Midway in the movie the father, who lives upstate with his grand wife (Jane Alexander), gathers the clan for a foray into the woods in search of psychedelic mushrooms. Visiting the city later in the story this swaggering character, whom everyone assumes to be Brian’s grandfather, behaves like an entitled boor. He uses terms like “your girl” for an executive assistant, wonders why there is no porter in Brian’s building and, when offered something to drink during a daytime business meeting, calls for bourbon.  The movie’s other wealthy paterfamilias, Al Lolly (John Goodman), who lives in a fancy loft, is also a  bully. When Brian sells him a $14,000 Swedish mattress, he refuses to the pay the usual delivery charges; without thinking twice he peppers his gay assistant with homophobic wisecracks. These two monarchs of their own private realms are too self-aggrandizing  to acknowledge any damage caused by their imperial ways.  The movie turns into a fragile love story after Al’s attractive daughter Harriet (Zooey Deschanel) visits the warehouse where Brian works and initiates an affair. Harriet is an emotionally wounded child of divorce and a sweet lost soul who gravitates from career choice to career choice without settling on anything. Ms. Deschanel, as always, exudes an appealing freshness and unpredictability.  With its off-center dialogue and upscale industrial settings, “Gigantic” strains to be original. But beneath its indie affectations it is really another contemplation of generational misunderstanding. Instead of the passionate ’60s and ’70s rebels pursuing authenticity in the material world, or ’80s and ’90s nihilists flamboyantly self-destructing, the movie’s meek lovebirds only want something worth their commitment.  “Gigantic” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for language, some sexual content and violence.
I don't remember ever wanting to just haul out and punch a movie before Gigantic . Interrupting every scene with a proud little fart of idiosyncrasy, Matt Aselton 's auteur debut provides another flimsy indie comedy for the heap. The screenplay's per-page quota of "unexpected" tweaks leaves little room for much else. There Will Be Blood 's overgrown Child of the Corn, Paul Dano , plays Brian : 28 years old, timid, single, a mattress salesman, on the waiting list to adopt a Chinese baby-an apparently unexamined boyhood dream. Feeb Brian meets another homeschool-eccentric rich kid, one "Happy," played by pellucid-eyed hipster desktop-pinup and chanteuse of naptime adult contemporary, Zooey Deschanel . Happy looks good in a shortie kimono and heels, and initiates intimacy with an abrupt "Do you have any interest in having sex with me?"-behavior probably learned from John Goodman 's voluminously inappropriate patriarch. Context clues suggest that the viewer is supposed to care if these nutty kids stay together. In my mind's eye's re-edit, the movie ends with a circa-1973 Joe Don Baker  unexpectedly rolling into town and stomping the entire dramatis personae into jelly, but in actual fact, it wraps up with some blogrock and the "Hey, maybe there's no such thing as 'normal,' and we're all just screwed up and searching, y'know? " revelation.
