 “Gigante,” a small, unpretentious slice of Uruguayan neo-realism, is a steadily observant portrait of the humdrum life of Jara (Horacio Camandule), a stocky 35-year-old night security guard in a supermarket on the outskirts of Montevideo.  His primary duty is to keep an eye out for shoplifting among the women who clean the floors at night. One evening he catches sight of Julia (Leonor Svarcas), a shapely young woman with a mop and bucket, and is instantly smitten.  Shy and overweight with kind eyes and no delusions of grandeur, Jara sleeps by day and on the weekends works as a nightclub bouncer; his hulking appearance belies the fact that he is the furthest thing from a menacing control freak. When Julia shows up at the club and tries to talk her way in without paying the cover charge, the ever-bashful Jara hides rather than introduce himself.  As he lumbers through his routine, Jara alternates between two T-shirts, one that reads “Biohazard” and the other “Motörhead.” He is a fan of heavy-metal rock, and it turns out that Julia shares his taste. At first Jara spends his working hours tracking Julia’s movements on the store’s surveillance monitors. As his romantic infatuation develops, he begins discreetly following her after work, trailing her to an Internet cafe and to her house.  There is no hint that Jara might be a dangerous stalker. Rather, he imagines himself Julia’s protector. And when he overhears a man in a car making obscene comments as she passes, he rushes to the vehicle and attacks him. Inside the store he watches in anguish as a younger, better-looking worker flirts with her. When they disappear into a part of the store where there are no cameras, he takes desperate action and activates the sprinkler system.  At one point he follows Julia on a date, and afterwards  strikes up a conversation with the man, whom she met on online; the date is not optimistic about his future prospects.  The first feature directed by Adrián Biniez, an Argentine-born musician turned filmmaker, “Gigante” is a calm, ground-level examination of a monotonous workplace with an oppressive hierarchy in which a minor mistake is cause to be fired.  Although the movie observes the restive disgruntlement that simmers among the workers, it is not overtly political. It is an appealing, gently comedic prologue to a love story.
The title refers to Jara (Horacio Camandule ), a swaybacked lug who stands a head taller than his co-workers at a warehouse-size Montevideo  supermarket, making it easy for him to amiably tune out their attempts at conversation. His graveyard-shift security beat consists of monotonously clicking through surveillance feed, making sure the after-hours crew doesn't steal from the store. One night, Jara lingers on the image of a girl on the mop brigade, Julia (Leonor Svarcas ). Next, instead of playing video games with his only confidante, a chubby preadolescent cousin, Jara spends his off hours tailing Julia, too paralyzed with shyness to speak to her. Gigante  begins with a double-bass pummel of thrash metal—afterward, the music is heard hummed, or coming muffled from Jara's screwed-in earbuds. The idea is that his opaque deadpan hides turmoil, and his hulking body, an unknown capacity for harm. But director Adrián Biniez  doesn't tease out that uncertainty as Jerzy Skolimowski  did in recent stalker film Four Nights With Anna , a masterful balancing act of ambivalence. With potentially lethargic materials, Biniez has made a quiet, intent, involving film, a moony-innocent urban alienation fairy tale of bashful ogre and village beauty—and it never quite crests.
