
A devoted homemaker in 1930s Belgium counters her husband's bad behavior with unconditional love in "Gilles' Wife." Told primarily via body language and facial expressions with a minimum of dialogue, beautifully observed, emotionally intense tale is an ambitious and rewarding outing for Frederic Fonteyne, five years after his "A Pornographic Affair." This title isn't as catchy, but the film that goes with it is solid arthouse fare for those who luxuriate in wrenching tales exquisitely told.
Viewers know they're in the presence of a helmer with terrific visual aptitude from pic's opening frames: Venture is endowed with a stunning sense of place, established and renewed with cinematic assurance that never slackens. Gilles (Clovis Cornillac) is seen laboring at a hellishly hot furnace in a factory before walking home down working-class streets to his adoring wife Elisa (Emmanuelle Devos). Although they've been married for years and have young twin daughters, their carnal complicity is obvious.
Elisa seems so besotted with her man and her modest lot in life that she almost comes across as slightly retarded. Whether she's scrubbing floors, serving food or literally keeping the home fires burning, Elisa looks at Gilles with loving, appreciative eyes. She wordlessly communicates her adoration of every hair on his head, the broad expanse of his back, his barrel chest.
When, pregnant with their third child and sensing Gilles may be fooling around with another woman, Elisa absorbs the insult in a manner from another era, so self-abnegating it feels radical seen through contemporary eyes.
What ensues is a fascinating look at how to handle interpersonal problems in a time before self-help books and omnipresent couples' counseling. Elisa brings haunting depth to the idea of an understanding spouse.
Awash in close-ups that wouldn't have been out of place in the silent era, painterly lensing tells the story primarily in pictures: The seasons pass, emotional turmoil simmers, erupts, evolves, reaches a plateau and then evolves some more. Period details are tops.
Devos and Cornillac are devastatingly spot-on, and relative newcomer Laura Smet does fine work as Elisa's younger sister, Victorine.
Without ever feeling "old-fashioned," pic's achievement is that it is so anchored in basic human feelings and elemental human needs that except for the use of color film and its frank sex scenes, much of it seems as if it could have been shot 70 years ago. (Indeed, the novel on which it's based was published in 1937.)
From accordion music and period songs to stridently dissonant accompaniment, the score is as thoughtful as the other elements.
Camera (color), Virginie Saint Martin; editor, Ewin Ryckaert; music, Vincent D'Hondt; production designer, Veronique Sacrez; costume designers, Christian Schnezler, Anne Fournier, Agnes Dubois; sound (Dolby), Carlo Thoss, Franco Piscopo; assistant director, Manu Kamanda. Reviewed at Pathe screening room, Paris, Aug. 19, 2004. (In Venice Film Festival -- Horizons.) Running time: 106 MIN. 

 


The demure heroine of Frédéric Fonteyne 's Gilles' Wife  is every bit as loyal and self-effacing as the movie's title implies. In a 1930s French industrial town, Elisa (Emmanuelle Devos ) lives in connubial bliss with her steelworker hubby Gilles (Clovis Cornillac ) and their twin daughters. A tireless super-housewife, Elisa cooks, cleans, sews, and retains enough energy to indulge Gilles's robust sexual appetite, which includes morning fucks and ample groping. Their domestic paradise comes to an unexpected end with the revelation of Gilles's infidelity, which throws Elisa into a spiral of self-doubt. Fearful that Gilles will ultimately leave her, Elisa permits him to carry on, thus establishing the extremely fine line between her role as forgiving saint and willing doormat.
Devos's performance is an expert workshop of internalized emotions and silent forbearance. As in Kings and Queen , her character essentially sacrifices herself on the altar of male neurosis while somehow retaining her dignity throughout. Possessing an ungainly mouth and nose, Devos is nevertheless capable of registering the slightest shifts in emotion, particularly in the scenes involving Elisa's slatternly sister Victorine (Laura Smet ), whose attentions to her brother-in-law prove less than familial. Fonteyne's previous film, An Affair of Love , was an all-talk sex drama that suavely gabbed its way through amorous uncertainty. In contrast, Gilles' Wife  is founded on ambiguous silences, moving from happiness to despair with tight-lipped apprehension. Devos could have been a consummate silent actress, as evidenced by the final scene. No longer certain of her role in her own family, Elisa drops the laundry, moves toward the door, and steps quietly out of life.
