A hair’s breadth from hagiography, Scott Hicks’s “Glass: A Portrait of Philip in Twelve  Parts” is much like its subject: affable, quotable and emotionally guarded in the extreme. Planned as a tribute to this work-obsessed musician, “Glass” proceeds genteelly through an intellectually inquisitive and deeply spiritual life. Balancing prodigious musical commitments with qigong and Taoism, Mr. Glass, who turned 71 in January, maintains a rigorous daily schedule that would daunt any man half his age. Somewhere on the fringes his current wife, Holly Critchlow,  and two infant children provide the sounds and comforts of family. Yet whether chatting about his aversion to music theory or appreciation of negative reviews, Mr. Glass — like his music — remains frustratingly distant. Interviews with friends, siblings and artistic collaborators like the artist Chuck Close and the filmmaker Errol Morris (“Philip does existential dread better than anyone”) only bolster the film’s admiring and self-satisfied tone. Not until the final minutes does this veneer crack as Mr. Hicks, almost in spite of himself, becomes hypnotized by Ms. Critchlow’s  sudden confession of emotional pain. While the camera clings to her massive brown eyes, the film falls awkwardly silent: like a lightning bolt on a gloomy day, her unexpected outburst is more harshly illuminating than anything that has gone before.

Though its title suggests a multifaceted consideration of Philip Glass, "Glass: A Portrait of Philip in Twelve Parts" is too little and too much of the minimalist composer -- too little of the music itself, too much of such trivia as Glass baking pizzas at home. Another superficial film about music from Scott Hicks ("Shine"), pic runs a distant second to the superior new film on John Adams and Peter Sellars, "Wonders Are Many," which really captures how a composer works. Even with Glass' considerable following, theatrical gigs appear less likely than robust DVD concerts.
Now 70, Glass is generally seen here in the present tense as he preps several projects at once -- unintentionally buttressing his critics' long-held argument that he frequently steals from himself. Recollections of his startling rise on Gotham's music scene are best encapsulated in a section devoted to "Einstein on the Beach," his breakthrough collaboration with Robert Wilson (inexplicably absent). Despite efforts to show the composer's domestic life, including his Buddhist-influenced daily exercise routines, there's no thoughtful discussion of what's behind the serialist music style Glass has brought to worldwide attention.
Camera (color, DV), Hicks; editor, Stephen Jess; music, Philip Glass. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Real to Reel), Sept. 11, 2007. Running time: 115 MIN.
 



Scott Hicks 's documentary portrait of Philip Glass  opens with an attempt to summon a little of Koyaanisqatsi 's bravado: As Glass's best-known score blasts, Hicks goes pseudo-avant-garde on a Coney Island  roller coaster, letting the cars flash by as a series of lights and diagonals. It's an ill-advised, rote gesture, but it's the last time style makes any appearance. The rest of the time, Glass  is a stupefyingly dull portrait of a man who doesn't seem to be lying when he says, "I have so few secrets." Not every biography needs to be obsessed with digging up drinking stories and sexual anecdotes: Glass is a serious artist (despite how currently trendy it is to dismiss him), and a close dissection of his work would've been welcome. Instead, we get Glass making vegetarian pizza from scratch while Hicks tries to force a metaphor as to how upper-middle-class culinary habits are a mirror for Glass's working process. Things perk up briefly in a segment devoted to soundtrack work, sparked by a typically loud Errol Morris  announcing, "I think collaboration should  be contentious," and an endearingly professional, non-neurotic Woody Allen  editing Cassandra's Dream . Otherwise, everyone seems to conclude that Glass is a) intensely private, or b) very interiorized, which tells us exactly nothing. The biggest revelation, at least for stalkers, is locating Glass's New York apartment; watch him receive visitors, recognize Enzo's Pizza, and head on over.
