 Arguably the most gifted of Hitler's henchmen, Joseph Goebbels was an enigmatic genius whose successful manipulation of mass political opinion was unprecedented. His rise to power, and that of the Nazi Party itself, will forever stand as one of history's most terrifying examples of the reach of propaganda, a tool with which Goebbels's name is virtually synonymous.  Less is known, however, about the workings of a personality so cultured yet so gripped by barbaric ideas. "The revolution is inside me," he wrote as a young man in 1918, revealing more than just his political hopes for Germany's future; for Goebbels, contentment would always be out of reach.  In their fascinating documentary  "The Goebbels Experiment," the director and writer Lutz Hachmeister and the writer Michael Kloft provide a rare and chilling glimpse into a brilliant but toxic mind. Rejecting commentary, Mr. Hachmeister and Mr. Kloft allow Goebbels to speak for himself, in the voice of Kenneth Branagh, via the extensive diaries that he kept from 1924 to 1945. Rare clips from German film and television archives illustrate the readings, which veer wildly from venomous, anti-Semitic rants to eloquent musings on music and nature, often in the same entry.  Waging a lifelong battle with suicidal depression, Goebbels found purpose in the creation of a new Reich and devotion to his Führer. Prescient about the value of a good slogan, he set about bending minds to his corrupt will with fanatical vigor and inventiveness.  Some of the film's most engrossing moments deal with Goebbels's exclusively utilitarian ambitions for German cinema. "We can learn a lot from these Bolsheviks," he reluctantly admits after a viewing of Sergei Eisenstein's 1927 epic, "Ten Days That Shook the World." And his belief in Leni Riefenstahl's ability doesn't deter him from deeming her a lunatic when she begs for money to finish her film "Triumph of the Will."  An intellectual in a party that reviled thinkers, Goebbels suffered from a paranoia that was always on high alert. Offered the position of head of broadcasting in 1933, he sees only an effort by his enemies to sideline him. ("Himmler hates me," he whines.) Careering from soggy sentimentality to maniacal extermination fantasies, the diary entries reveal a supremely theatrical man whose charisma and callousness fuse in a recurring image of elegant hands conducting an audience to frenzy.  At a time when much of our news and entertainment media is controlled by a handful of corporations, "The Goebbels Experiment" is a cautionary reminder that equal access to the machinery of ideas may be society's most critical goal.

A man whose name has become a byword for pure evil gets a disarming makeover in "The Goebbels Experiment." Far from being the horror show expected from its title, Lutz Hachmeister's cool, almost anti-dramatic docu paints a portrait of an insecure manic-depressive solely through extracts from Joseph Goebbels' own voluminous diaries. Given the thriving new market in WWII and Nazi memorabilia, pubcaster and cable slots look likely.
A well-chosen selection of pictures and archival footage, plus some modern sequences in color, concisely sketch the history of Germany during the 21 years Goebbels continuously kept a diary (1924-45). From his days at Heidelberg U., Goebbels suffered from bouts of deep depression, and the voice that emerges is of a neat, intensely self-serving little man -- the ultimate rational bureaucrat but with political ambitions -- who was subject to bouts of whining and periods of rapturous happiness. "First comes the Party, second (devoted wife) Magda," he once wrote, and as the film makes clear, that pretty much summed up his attitude to anything from dull Bavarians to Hitler or the Jewish "pest." (Treatment of Jews forms only a tiny part of the docu.)
Camera (color/B&W), Hajo Schomerus; editor, Guido Krajewski; music, Hubert Bittman. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama Documentary), Feb. 15, 2005. Running time: 107 MIN.
 


"July 15, 1935, Saturday: Lazed around, chatting with the Führer." So went a typical relaxing weekend in the life of Joseph Goebbels , as recorded in his personal diary, which forms the text of Lutz Hachmeister 's documentary. Proceeding chronologically from 1924 up to Goebbels's death at the end of World War II, The Goebbels Experiment  sets the entries to briskly edited archival footage, taken mostly from the period. The master propagandist comes across here as a brooding, insecure megalomaniac—or at times, a bitchy member of a particularly malevolent high school clique, an effect enhanced by some of narrator Kenneth Branagh 's English line readings. The filmmakers aren't wholly off base in banking on the inherent interest of the primary-source material—Goebbels's frequent invectives against Jews retain the power to disturb and there are some lines that you don't hear every day ("Goering really is a nice chap"). Some of the most revealing bits find Goebbels playing film critic, but despite an early clip from Eisenstein's Ten Days That Shook the World  (Goebbels's take: "Too explicitly propagandistic. Less would have been more effective"), the filmmakers largely take Goebbels's injunction against "aestheticizing experimentation" to heart, eschewing dialectical montage and allowing the clips to merely illustrate the diary entries. One can only imagine what Eisenstein might have done with this material.
