 It's little wonder that Dani Levy's farce "Go for Zucker" has been a phenomenal hit in Germany. For one thing, it's the rare German movie calling itself a comedy that is actually funny, even if only in bits and pieces. More important, it addresses lingering schisms in German society with the audacity of a loud, cynical sitcom. Its style might be described as a hybrid of the much funnier French farce "La Cage aux Folles" and the recent Israeli comedy "Ushpizin."  The movie suggests that those schisms, between East and West, between Germans and Jews, are much ado about little when the stakes are a pot of gold. In its money-grubbing ethos, naked greed in the shared pursuit of a windfall can resolve the stickiest cultural and religious conflicts.  All these conflicts are embodied by the divided family of Jaeckie Zucker (Henry Hübchen), originally Jakob Zuckermann, which came apart in 1961 when the Berlin Wall was erected and Zucker's mother fled to the West with her first-born son, Samuel. Left behind in East Berlin, Jaeckie shucked off his Jewish background, changed his name and became a celebrity sportscaster. But those glory days are way in the past. A compulsive gambler, pool shark and alcoholic slob who hangs out in a seedy nightclub, he finds himself nearly 45,000 euros in debt.  His disgusted wife, Marlene (Hannelore Elsner), has asked for a divorce. When he misses the deadline for a payment, his grown son, Thomas (Steffen Groth), the branch manager of a bank, shows up at his door with the police. Unless Jaeckie comes up with the dough, his next stop will be prison.  In desperation, he signs up for a European pool tournament; if he wins, it will solve his financial problems. Meanwhile, news arrives that Jaeckie's mother has died. According to her will, neither he nor his estranged brother, Samuel (Udo Samel), an Orthodox Jew, can receive his inheritance unless they reconcile. With all eyes on the prize, Jaeckie and Marlene decide to pose as observant Jews, purchase the appropriate religious paraphernalia and invite Samuel and his family to stay with them for the funeral and shiva. When the hated relatives arrive, they show up with their late mother's pompous, eagle-eyed rabbi (Rolf Hoppe), on the lookout for any bending of the rules.  If "Go for Zucker" spares no one in its ridicule, Jaeckie and his stunts fuel the movie's comic engine. To compete in the tournament and avoid sitting shiva, Jaeckie, who suggests a German Jewish Rodney Dangerfield in his gleeful boorishness, fakes two heart attacks that land him in the hospital, from which he rushes to the tournament. At one point, Samuel unwittingly takes Ecstasy, thinking that it's aspirin, and lands in a nightclub and in the lap of a Palestinian beauty.  Samuel's wife, Golda (Golda Tencer), is crude and obese; his son, Joshua (Sebastian Blomberg), is a humorless zealot; his sex-crazed daughter, Lilly (Elena Uhlig), can't keep her hands off the shy, terrified Thomas.  How much is "Go for Zucker" likely to tickle American audiences? Enough, I would guess, to generate some chuckles, but not enough to bring down the house. Some movies travel overseas more easily than others.
At one point in Looking for Comedy in the Muslim World , an eager gaggle of Al Jazeera  producers attempt to recruit Albert Brooks  for a sitcom to be called That Darn Jew!  The title might just as easily have served Dani Levy 's Go for Zucker  .
An enormous hit in Germany, Levy's breezy farce begins with a comatose man narrating from a hospital gurney. Flashbacks reveal Jaeckie Zucker, né Jakob Zuckermann , as a pool hustler and gambler from the east whose dissolute, debt-ridden routine is interrupted by the news that his long- estranged mother has died in Frankfurt . There's even an inheritance that Zucker and his gentile wife will have to kosher themselves to get—the fun continues when Zucker's ultra-Orthodox brother arrives from Frankfurt mit frau und kinder .
Not quite Rodney Dangerfield , sad-faced Henry H (an erstwhile East German actor who 30 years ago played a ghetto Jew in the original Jacob the Liar ) brings a quality of debonair desperation to Jaeckie's frantic maneuvers. He may be a lovable rogue (faking a heart attack as his mother is lowered into her grave, playing the Holocaust card to avoid elimination from a billiards tournament), but there's a definite shortage of wacky neighbors. Levy's project to restore a Jewish dimension to German culture is extremely circumspect in addressing that culture. Given that Jaeckie's people are largely hypocritical money-grubbers who travesty traditional burial rites, Go for Zucker  is mildly tasteless (natürlich ), if not exactly uproarious.
The tension between assimilated Jews and their "primitive" ostjude  brethren is a staple of European Jewish comedy (and anxiety), but Go for Zucker is actually more German in playing uptight Westerners against scurvy Easterners. Indeed, the movie would have greater resonance were Zucker an unreconstructed, obnoxious DDR-nik. At least, Levy would have covered all available Nazi-era Jewish stereotypes—greedy whoremonger, religious charlatan, and capitalist schemer, joined by the latter's alter ego, Communist subversive.
