 “It is all sexes, all ages, all nationalities,” announces Eugene Hütz, the charismatic Ukrainian-born founder and frontman of the Gypsy punk band Gogol Bordello, in Margarita Jimeno’s choppy, high-energy documentary of the band’s rise from a cult phenomenon to international acclaim. The scenes of the nine-member band, which includes two dancers, in theatrical attire cavorting with the audience in a Lower Manhattan club are beyond joyous. Anthems like “Immigrant Punk,” powered by a frantic pogo beat strung with wild, squealing accordion and violin that suggest demonically fueled klezmer music, generate an ecstatic communal anarchy.  Mr. Hütz, a skinny, baggy-eyed live wire with an earring and a waxed handlebar mustache who is partly of Roma descent and who performs shirtless, could be described as the Iggy Pop of an Eastern European sound he says was influenced by Bartok. Having appeared in two films — “Everything Is Illuminated,” with Elijah Wood, and the Madonna-directed “Filth and Wisdom”  — he has become a borderline movie star as well as a postpunk guru.  In “Gogol Bordello Non-Stop” he emerges as a passionate, articulate philosopher of punk’s democratic participatory aesthetic who espouses the rejection of social hierarchies in concerts that are raucous, bacchanalian performance-art carnivals.  In the movie’s weaker segments several troupe members, who range  in age roughly  from 25 to 50, tell their stories. By far the most compelling is Mr. Hütz’s tale of fleeing Kiev on an odyssey that took him through Italy, Austria, Hungary and Poland, landing in Vermont in 1993 through a relocation program.  Near the end of the film he decries how media “brainwashing” and the cultivation of a “celebrity lifestyle” are the almost-too-tempting-to-resist enemies of artistic free expression. So far, it seems, he has held the line.
A whirling dervish of rafter-swinging rebellion, gypsy-punk rockers Gogol Bordello  (led by handlebar-mustached beanpole Eugene Hütz —beloved New York DJ, accidental co-star of Everything Is Illuminated , and lead in Madonna 's film Filth  and Wisdom ) are notorious for their uninhibited, highly theatrical live shows. It would be impossible to bottle that lightning for the screen, but fan and filmmaker Margarita Jimeno's five-year journey with the band is like a gateway drug, shot in scruffy DV that's suitable for Hütz's gleefully debauched, outsider persona. The magnetic frontman, who landed in the U.S. as a political refugee in the early '90s, after the Chernobyl  disaster displaced his Ukrainian family for years, is hilariously candid about his influences (Béla Bartók  is a significant one, as is Hütz's Romani heritage) and his complex relationship to art, politics, and his immigrant identity. We also hear from some of Hütz's bandmates—the squeezebox player, the violinist, the dancer—about how this crazy nomad roped them into his carnival, but they don't have enough to say to justify the overlong backstage follies. Still, it's an exhilarating document, the peak of which is a 1988 home video from Kiev , in which a teenage Hütz wriggles to a Michael Jackson  song, and a subtle hint materializes to explain what motivated his impressive 'stache.
