         "Going Shopping" is yet another idiosyncratic comedy collaboration between Henry Jaglom and his wife, star and co-writer Victoria Foyt, and, with "Eating" and "Babyfever" it completes an informal trilogy that treats women's anxieties over food, motherhood and now clothes with humor and affection.
 
  Foyt's Holly Gilmore is the proprietor of a trendy boutique on Santa Monica's upscale Montana Avenue. Holly designs many of the clothes in a studio above the store and is a natural saleswoman. She has worked hard to establish the store over the last decade, so it comes as a shock, as Mother's Day weekend approaches, that she will lose her lease on Monday if she does not come up with $40,000. Holly learns the hard way that she has become the latest in a long line of otherwise smart women who have foolishly entrusted their finances to a smooth-talking lover, in Holly's case Bruce Davison's Adam, who chides Holly for her lack of faith and vision, ignoring the imminent loss of the business that means so much to her.
 


         






    Walking out on Adam, Holly buckles down to trying to meet the imminent deadline. Signs proclaiming 30% off on all merchandise swiftly go up. Calls are made to regular customers about the sale, and Holly casts about for a quick loan. Sizing up the shifty-looking boyfriend (Joseph Feury) of her eccentric mother (Lee Grant), she guesses correctly that he can line her up with a loan shark (Robert Romanus); there's also the hope that her richest customer (Cynthia Sikes) can come up with a $100,000 investment.
 
  Sikes' Lisa is also a member of the film's very large Greek chorus of shoppers, whose revelations of what shopping means to them intercut the complications, at once funny and rueful, that swirl around the distraught but game Holly. Some of these revelations are hilarious, such as one woman's disclosure that she "shops like a man eats: I don't look up until I'm done and filled up." Another woman remarks with absurd grimness that shopping is "not an amateur sport. You go, you buy, you wear." Jaglom's pace is buoyant, but he could have done with a few less of his shopper choristers.
 
  There's a warm sense of bonding between Holly, her mother, Winnie, and her daughter Coco (Mae Whitman), yet Winnie proves full of surprises. Jaglom has said that creating Winnie gave Grant the opportunity to draw from her own colorful mother's unusual concepts of resourcefulness. As if Holly didn't have her hands full, a charming man, Miles (Rob Morrow), in search of a purse for his picky girlfriend (Jennifer Grant), finds himself attracted to her.
 
  Hanania Baer, Jaglom's usual cinematographer, brings a glow to "Going Shopping," which is already suffused with Jaglom's characteristic affection for women. At times movies seem rife with misogyny, yet Jaglom consistently expresses a love for women in his films. It's also never merely a matter of physical attraction, for he clearly also likes women for themselves.
 
 
'Going Shopping'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for brief strong language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Suitable for older children
 
  A Rainbow Releasing presentation. Director-editor Henry Jaglom. Producer Judith Wolinsky. Screenplay by Victoria Foyt and Jaglom. Cinematographer Hanania Baer. Costumes Gail Dekrassel. Production designer John Mott. Running time: 1 hour, 46 minutes.
 
  At selected theaters.   


Having previously explored women's attitudes toward food in "Eating" and reproduction/fertility in "Babyfever," Henry Jaglom examines femme feelings about their consumer habits in "Going Shopping." Latest film suffers by comparison, however, because shopping is inherently a less compelling topic than eating or having babies (though die-hard shoppers might insist it's far more satisfying). Item may draw curious women looking to cool their heels, say, while out shopping, but straight men can be expected to stay away in droves and Jaglom regulars will probably wait for the DVD.
Because women's thoughts about food and babies are inextricably tied into their feelings about their own bodies, "Eating" and "Babyfever" touched female angst and offered moments of surprising poignancy. While shopping presents the same potential for obsessive behavior, the worst thing one can say about it, given our capitalist culture, is that uncontrolled shopping can send you into debt.
In familiar Jaglom style, "Going Shopping" interweaves the on-camera "confessions" of some four-dozen women with a narrative structured around the events transpiring over a Mother's Day weekend sale at a pricey Los Angeles boutique. As the sale approaches, proprietress/designer Holly G. (co-scribe and longtime collaborator Victoria Foyt) learns her boyfriend/accountant (Bruce Davison) has squandered her earnings; unless she can come up with three months' back rent, she faces eviction.
Story follows Holly's misbegotten attempts to find the money -- first from a loan shark, then from a friend -- while she simultaneously tries to mend fences with her mother (Lee Grant) and daughter (Mae Whitman). When a charming younger man (Rob Morrow) shows up one day shopping for his difficult-to-please girlfriend (Jennifer Grant), Holly rightly senses a new romantic possibility.
As usual, it's the faux confessions that are the most engaging, and often feel the most accurate, specifically the ruminations on the horrors of dressing-room lighting and ghastly mirrors, and the shared belief that shopping holds a short-term cure for depression.
Because it doesn't probe much deeper than that, however, "Going Shopping" inadvertently reduces women to a variety of cliches, probably reinforcing many men's worst fears.
The camera work is largely unobtrusive. Use of actual locations, specifically for the boutique, ironically feels too cramped to offer the verisimilitude that a set might have provided. It's worth noting that some of the fashions are created by Jennifer Nicholson, the designer daughter of Jaglom's old friend Jack.

I'm a rugby-playing, Maxim -subscribing, Motorhead -obsessed dude, but I know a hideous floral-print dress when I see one. The Santa Monica  boutique of Holly G. (co-writer and Jaglom spouse Victoria Foyt ) serves its customers complimentary tea and biscotti to compensate for the type of overpriced clothing that screams, "I have serious marital issues!" No wonder da Holly G. show has one Mother's Day weekend to raise dough or close up shop. Tea and biscotti add up. Henry Jaglom 's latest study of contemporary female obsessions among a noxious clan of West L.A. bourgeoisie is of more pathological than cinematic interest. Is any other filmmaker so strongly identified as a self-hating male? Jaglom has obvious humanist tendencies, but only for women. The men in Going Shopping  function either as sources of income or selfish enablers of female hysteria. It's enough to make us wonder, as talking-head shopaholics confess their fear and desire to the camera, whether these women are confronting their own obsessions or Jaglom's. The same question might apply to Sally Potter , vis-à-vis her upcoming trilogy: Cheating, Harleyfever , and Going (Porn) Shopping .
