''Presented'' by Martin Scorsese, the Italian immigration drama Golden Door  is a sluggish procedural on what it was like to make the journey to Ellis Island back in the day. As a Sicilian widower (Vincenzo Amato) leads his mother and two sons overseas, we don't see that much that Chaplin didn't cover when he made The Immigrant  in 1917. Despite a few welcome bits of whimsy, and the lovely presence of The Science of Sleep 's Charlotte Gainsbourg as a sad-faced Englishwoman on the boat, Door  feels as long as a transatlantic voyage.

 In its basic outline the story told in “Golden Door,” Emanuele Crialese’s beautiful dream of a film, is hardly unfamiliar. Some version of this immigrant’s tale — setting out from the old country, crossing the Atlantic in steerage, arriving at Ellis Island — is part of the family history of millions of Americans. But what makes Mr. Crialese’s telling unusual, apart from the gorgeousness of his wide-screen compositions, is that his emphasis is on departure and transition, rather than arrival.  His film takes its English title from the Emma Lazarus poem about the Statue of Liberty, but the lady in the harbor, like the rest of America (apart from Ellis Island), remains unseen as the director takes us up to the door but not through it. The Italian title, “Nuovomondo,” means “new world,” but this too is a bit misleading. It is the Old World that dominates this chronicle of Italian peasants striking out for a future they can barely imagine, and the achievement of the movie is to immerse the modern viewer in a way of perceiving the world that has nearly been forgotten. You may have looked at stiff, yellowing pictures of ancestors from a century ago and wondered what they thought and felt, and it is this kind of curiosity that “Golden Door” comes remarkably close to satisfying.  In the days before aviation the physical distance between rural Italy and New York City was vaster than it is now, but “Golden Door” is as much about time travel as it is about the geographical kind. Salvatore Mancuso (Vincenzo Amato) and his family effectively live in the Middle Ages, cut off from nearly every manifestation of modernity. When Salvatore strikes up conversations below decks, he is startled to learn that people from other villages speak a common language.  Illiterate and superstitious, he is first enticed to embark on the journey by crude postcards that show America as a place where giant coins grow on bushes, where onions are as big as donkey carts and chickens as big as donkeys. And when he must make that decision, Salvatore scrambles up a craggy hill with a stone in his mouth, laying it down at the shrine of a saint whose supernatural counsel he seeks.  The actual America, which is to say Ellis Island, is shown as a place of rigorous but not altogether malignant bureaucratic procedure, where the new arrivals are subjected to physical and psychological tests meant to determine their fitness. (Arranging differently shaped blocks in a rectangular tray does not seem inherently more rational than carrying a stone up a hill in your mouth.) There is also a decorous if somewhat creepy marriage market, where bachelors who have established themselves in America offer themselves — and legal status — to women from back home.  The film does not patronize Salvatore, who is brave, dignified and clever as well as unlettered. He gathers his grandmother, his son and his brother (who does not speak and may not be able to hear) along with two young mail-order brides from the village and does his best to protect them all on their journey.  Before boarding the boat they encounter an Englishwoman named Lucy Peters (Charlotte Gainsbourg), whose air of almost aristocratic refinement stands in striking contrast to their rough rusticity. Why this delicate, entitled creature should be joining the wretched refuse is never explained (though an American immigration official does note that it’s unusual to find an Englishwoman in a boatload of Italians), a decision that contributes to the film’s mysterious, almost magical atmosphere.  The wary infatuation that begins to flicker between Lucy and Salvatore provides a lovely note of romance, and the sentimentality that inevitably infuses a story like this rarely feels soft or overwrought. There is fear and confusion on the faces of the travelers, but also expectation and wonder. And even if we know, more or less, what lies in store for them — their children will be our parents and grandparents after all — we can’t help but share in their feeling of anticipation.  “Golden Door” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). There is some brief nudity.

An imaginative, intelligent and attractive Italo pic precisely when the country needs it most, Emanuele Crialese's "Golden Door" reps a solid piece of cinema that neither panders nor preaches. Moving from rural Sicily to third-class steerage to Ellis Island, this tripartite tale of a family's journey from the Old World to the New propels them from a superstitious past into a colder-eyed modernity. Meticulously researched, pic slips only when it uncharacteristically departs from the focused story and too obviously attempts a lesson. Sure to be a prize winner, "Golden Door" should find glittering prospects waiting on both local and offshore screens.
Long in gestation, pic was given an initial treatment by Crialese in '99 with the assistance of producer Robert Chartoff, but, only after the success of Crialese's sophomore flick, "Respiro: Garzia's Island," did Italo-French funding come together giving Crialese a green light for "Golden Door." Filming started in Sicily and then moved to Argentina, where an old hotel in Buenos Aires doubled for Ellis Island.
Opening moments reaffirm Crialese's affinity for landscape. A barefoot Salvatore Mancuso (Vincenzo Amato) and his older son Angelo (Francesco Casisa) scramble up a rocky mountainside with stones in their mouths as proof of their devotion to the wooden cross at the top. Set against this unforgiving topography, the two seem part of a primitive, pagan world where superstition, fostered by Salvatore's wryly no-nonsense mother Fortunata (Aurora Quattrocchi), controls daily actions.
Against his mother's wishes, Salvatore decides they must emigrate to America. He sells his livestock, obtaining shoes (probably his first pair), cloaks and hats for himself, Angelo and mute younger son Pietro (Filippo Pucillo). Along with villagers Rita (Federica de Cola) and Rosa (Isabella Ragonese), promised to unmarried men in America, they set off for a Sicilian coastal city where the ship awaits.
Crialese details their first journey from village to city, which entails a monumental leap from the familiar, earthy world they know to the grey-stoned claustrophobic scrabble of the urban locale, as foreign to them as anything in another country.
Incongruously standing among them is Lucy (Charlotte Gainsbourg), dressed in bourgeois clothes in contrast to the peasant garb of others, and speaking English to boot. Crialese leaves her background a mystery but makes it clear that she's willing to use her feminine charms to get on that ship and get to America.
A terrific shot of the parted crowds as the ship pulls out begins the next phase of the journey. Squeezed into restrictive bunks with little light and no privacy, Salvatore good-naturedly protects Lucy from verbal barbs.
The approach to Ellis Island is covered in fog (reminiscent of Fellini's "And the Ship Sails On"), preventing the passengers, now dressed in their regional finery, from seeing the New World. Immediately upon arrival, they're subjected to a series of tests, both medical and social, to assess their worthiness to go through the "Golden Door" to the other side.
For the immigrants America was a land of miracles, and since Crialese stops the drama literally at the exit portals of Ellis Island, disillusionment never takes hold. Instead, their early excitement is conveyed through doctored photo-postcards sent to the Old World depicting impossibly large vegetables, and coins growing on trees. Fantasy sequences are layered in with Salvatore imagining enormous olives and a river of milk (reappearing as a lovely final image).
There's a last minute misstep when the mute Pietro speaks, and an argument with immigration officials feels too scripted, especially when everything else seems so genuine. Gainsbourg's character is never given any motivation, and her performance feels equally, perhaps appropriately, illusory. Amato (who also played papa to Casisa and Pucillo in "Respiro") charmingly captures Salvatore's openness and innocence without making him into some silly bumpkin, and Quattrocchi is magnetic in all her scenes.
Claire Denis' regular d.p. Agnes Godard does her usual splendid work in lensing the visual riches, from Sicilian landscapes to the corral-like bins of Ellis Island. Music is generally unobtrusive, though two incongruous Nina Simone songs ("Sinnerman" and "Feeling Good") have a jarring effect that adds little to the pic's intentions.

Emanuele Crialese 's poetic tale of emigration at the turn of the 20th century follows an illiterate Sicilian farmer (Vincenzo Amato ) and his family who, after seeing doctored photographs of money growing on trees, set their sights on America. Clinging to their meager belongings as tightly as they do their old world superstitions, they arrive at Ellis Island , shadowed by a mysterious English woman (Charlotte Gainsbourg ), and are treated like animals: poked, prodded, and interrogated by an assembly line of white-coated doctors intent on weeding out "undesirables." The film is a portrait gallery of faces, its long stretches of silence broken only by sounds in nature: the braying of donkeys, the moaning of the ship as it lurches forward. With dialogue kept to a minimum, cinematographer Agnés Godard  confirms her status as one of the most extraordinary visual artists working today.
