Pitched somewhere between Farrelly brothers-lite and some oddball National Lampoon
 outing, Good Luck Chuck
 is as familiar as it is charming, which isn't to say it's a good film. Far from it. The high-concept idea, in which Cook's dentist, Charlie, is cursed in an opening flashback to a disastrous round of adolescent spin the bottle by an amorous gothling, is rife with promise. The curse, which renders the adult Charlie unable to maintain a meaningful (or otherwise) relationship with women (who then go on to find their true Mr. Right the moment they dump poor Chuck), may be the engine that propels the story, but it's Cook and Alba's creepy chemistry that makes the film tolerable. She's Cam, a penguin-obsessed zoo worker, who meets cute with Charlie at a mutual friend's wedding. Aware of his many one-night stands but unaware of the curse, she at first turns down his offer of a date. But Charlie, convinced that she's the one, pursues her with an increasingly desperate vigor, made even more manic and disturbing after he and Fogler's obnoxious buddy/wingman uncover the heretofore undreamed of curse. Will Charlie and Cam hook up in the end? Does Dane Cook remind you of Ryan Reynolds? Is Good Luck Chuck
 cynical rom-com filmmaking masquerading as bubbly fluff? It's a trifecta of mediocrity, but strangely, among all the gross-out gags (Fogler proves his friendship by sleeping with the largest woman in town; Charlie gets it on with his equally voluminous secretary in a moment of matrimonial sympathy), there's some genuine comic talent, most notably from Cook, who's done this sort of thing before in Employee of the Month
, and Fogler, whose recent turn in Balls of Fury
 carries a matter-of-fact comic hubris that matches his physical girth. Alba, for her part, mines the screwball comedy slapstick with pratfalls galore, though it's still tough to buy her, as the film asks us to, as a completely disjointed klutz. Director Helfrich and company have aimed low and scored a reasonably inoffensive also-ran. It's a strictly date-night-rental affair, and if you still get Ryan Reynolds and Dane Cook confused, this will do little to help sort things out.


In "Good Luck Chuck," Jessica Alba resumes her fearless quest to make someone, somewhere, laugh. For this occasion, she plays a sweet dingbat being pursued by Dane Cook. That he wants her at all testifies to Alba's appeal as a cover girl, not her prowess as a comedian.
This obnoxious, ugly-looking movie isn't even about her. It's about how sex with Cook guarantees certain women (chesty, blonde, dim) that the next man they meet will be Mr. Right. Cook's character, a dentist named Chuck, doesn't want this curse. All he wants is Alba. And like most movies in which Alba appears, this one can't wait to strip her down to her panties. This is less an affront to women than it is to comedy.
The filmmakers think the best way to make Alba accessibly human is to humiliate her. So Cam, the penguin trainer she plays, is a klutz. If she can walk into a pole or bang her face on the foot of an ice slide, she does. This is excruciating and exasperatingly unfunny, like standing under a piñata that yields no treats regardless of how many times you beat it.
In her defense, no one with breasts in this movie is funny, not even Chuck's fat, horny best friend, Stu (Dan Fogler), although we're supposed to find him a riot. Stu is a doctor who keeps Pamela Anderson's original implants in a case in his office. He says he masturbates to one patient's mammograms. And he berates Chuck for finding one-night-stands with dozens of women a chore.
The character exists in part to make Chuck seem virtuous. So when Chuck lies beneath his desperate assistant, a big, bossy black woman, it's played as an act of cringe-inducing charity. What? Stereotypes need love, too.
Cook works hard to be funny and stay likable. But respectability doesn't suit him. Either that or movies don't. He hasn't yet found a way to get laughs out of being a nice guy in a romantic comedy. Then again, if you've found yourself in a movie that permits you to make out with Jessica Alba over and over, I imagine being funny, smart, or entertaining is probably the last thing on your mind.
"Good Luck Chuck" was written by Josh Stolberg and directed by Mark Helfrich, a veteran film editor of such classics as "Action Jackson" and "Showgirls" as well as most of Brett Ratner's movies. There's a crumb of a good idea here. Chuck fights the urge to have sex with Cam, who's ready to go, because, according to his affliction, she'll just fall for another man. It's a good device either for science-fiction or romantic comedy. But since there's no intelligence to drive the jokes, the gimmick turns tiresome quick.
Instead, "Good Luck Chuck" doubles as an excuse for its makers to come to work and gawk at topless chicks. In that respect, the filmmaking and the the breasts have something in common: They're fake.


I’ve occasionally heard Dane Cook, one of the stars of “Good Luck Chuck,” described as a comedian. I find this confusing, since my understanding is that comedians are people who say and do things that are funny. Perhaps Mr. Cook is some new kind of conceptual satirist whose shtick is to behave in the manner of a person attempting to be funny without actually being, you know, funny. Or maybe he answered an ad in the back of a magazine and sent away for a mail-order license to practice comedy. Whether Jessica Alba, his co-star, acquired her acting credentials by similar means is an issue that will be addressed if she ever tries to act. To be fair (but why?) she does expend a little effort in “Good Luck Chuck,” pretending to be goofy and clumsy, doing stuff like running into a metal pole, catching her skirt in a car door and upending a tray of dentist’s instruments. But the main audience for this dim little sex comedy has no particular interest in seeing Ms. Alba act. They want to see her in her underwear and also to confront one of the central cultural questions of our time: will she take her top off? No spoilers here! In the meantime plenty of less famous women do take their tops off, which will make “Good Luck Chuck” a must-see for young men with a subscription to Maxim but no access to the Internet. The intended viewership seems to consist of guys who fantasize about sleeping with Ms. Alba, which may represent a reasonably large share of the population. The actual paying audience, however, will more likely be those poor, deluded souls — they’ve Hi-lited all the relevant passages of that notorious pickup manual “The Game” — who think they might really have a shot. The makers of “Good Luck Chuck” (it was directed by Mark Helfrich from a script by Josh Stolberg) try for the blend of filth and sentimentality that has made movies like “The Wedding Crashers” and the recent productions of the Judd Apatow atelier such big hits. What they end up proving (by negative example) is that even lowbrow comedy requires skill and intelligence. Instead  they offer breasts, penis jokes and a cavalcade of wildly unoriginal ideas. Mr. Cook’s character has a doofus friend (Dan Fogler, in case “Balls of Fury” didn’t satisfy your need to be reminded of his existence). Ms. Alba’s character is crazy about penguins. Her brother (Lonny Ross) smokes a lot of pot. Apparently the very notion of fat women having sex is screamingly hilarious, though not as funny as the image of a three-breasted woman or a chubby man having sex with a grapefruit. (Typing that phrase turns out to be kind of amusing, but trust me, you don’t need to see it.) It all ends with the guy running through the airport to bring back the girl, who’s about to take off for Antarctica. I mean, come on! What passes for cleverness is the movie’s central conceit: Chuck (that would be Mr. Cook) suffers under a curse that causes every woman he goes to bed with to fall in love with the next guy who asks her out. When the local ladies find out about this, Chuck gets a lot of action, but then —  after a long, split-screen montage of his priapic exertions —  he starts to feel empty and used. Me too. But if the logic of  “Good Luck Chuck” holds, the next movie I see should be a masterpiece. “Good Luck Chuck” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has naughty words and topless women.

Those who said "yes" to "Good Luck Chuck" doubtless did so emboldened by visions of "Wedding Crashers" -- a hard-R romantic comedy with a matrimonial hook. Here, a guy is renowned because women find true love after
 sleeping with him. Yet for an aspiring romp awash in sex and nudity, director Mark Helfrich's directing debut proves painfully flaccid -- a movie that simultaneously squanders its leads and its DVD extras. Dane Cook sells out arenas with his stand-up act, and Jessica Alba is, well, Jessica Alba, but once "Chuck" exhausts their devoted bases, this doesn't promise to bring much good luck to Lionsgate.
 Introduced as a kid playing a spin-the-bottle game that goes wildly wrong, the grown-up Chuck (Cook) is now a successful dentist. His girlfriend dumps him, however, for being unable to say "I love you," and, at a former girlfriend's wedding, he's toasted as the good-luck charm that propelled her to a better relationship.
At that wedding, Chuck meets Cam (Alba), a penguin specialist at the local aquatic park who's as accident-prone as she is beautiful. This leads, briefly and awkwardly, to an extended interlude that plays like an entirely different movie -- with Cam suffering a series of pratfalls and mix-ups that usually leave Chuck one step from the emergency room, which does nothing to cool his ardor for her.
Around this point, though, the movie veers back to its ostensible theme, the one writer Josh Stolberg embellished from the experiences (that is, having more than one woman get hitched not long after dating him) of pic's associate producer Steve Glenn.
As the legend of his magical touch grows, and Cam proves strangely aloof, Chuck gradually bows to servicing women, in part at the urging of his life-long friend Stu ("Balls of Fury's" Dan Fogler), a lascivious cosmetic surgeon with a mammary fixation.
Ultimately, most everything between the wedding and the credits feels like a lot of juvenile nonsense to keep Charles and Cam apart, as he fears bedding her will bring his gift/curse to bear and lose him the one girl he's truly loved. It also results in a wildly uneven tone, with sappy stretches interrupted by madcap bursts, many of them vaguely misogynistic (including more than one sequence involving obese women) and possessing scant appeal beyond pubescent boys who'll need somebody else to buy them a ticket to get in.
Helfrich has worked as an editor on the "Rush Hour" series, but this maiden directorial effort could have used some strategic cuts. And while Cook is undeniably attractive and charismatic, the range required to sell his hexed lead handcuffs him, while Alba -- however adorable -- can't overcome the lack of consistency surrounding her character, whose unlucky streak conveniently comes and goes depending on where we are in the story.
Fogler and Lonny Ross (of NBC's "30 Rock"), as Cam's bong-hitting brother, deliver a few laughs, but hardly enough to provide the movie a consistent pulse. Shot in Canada, the overall production is equally modest, providing no sense of location other than the uninspired aquatic park setting, where the movie even stoops to a penguin-poop gag.
Perhaps the most consoling thought for all involved, in fact, would be one adapted from "Chuck's" central premise -- namely, better luck with the next movie.
