There are things in Good Hair , Chris Rock's deeply funny and very serious documentary about the African-American obsession with straightened tresses, that may make your hair stand right up on end. Here are a few of the movie's fascinatingly fun facts:
· The hair ''relaxer'' used by African-Americans for many decades is sodium hydroxide, which   will eat away a soda can in two hours and leave you with permanent bald spots if it seeps into your scalp. (Peering into an 18,000-pound vat of the stuff, Rock remarks, ''This would last Prince for about a month!'') The asymmetric hair that Salt-N-Pepa made iconic was the result of a relaxer accident.
· The weaves that are now legion among African-American women can easily cost the most modest working-class folks $1,000 a pop. Those high-maintenance 'dos have become an integral point in the politics of black dating.
· The next time you see an artist like Eve or Nia Long (both interviewed in the film), there's a good chance that the hair they're wearing once belonged to a woman from India who cut it off in a religious ceremony.
Rock, who co-wrote Good Hair  and serves as its guiding host, is hilariously aware of the cultural insecurities that have driven many African-Americans to spend a fortune on straightening their hair. Yet by structuring the film around the Bronner Bros. Hair Show, a battle-of-the-salon-stars so over-the-top it's like Iron Chef  meets Paris Is Burning , Rock gives Good Hair a rousing message: Where African-Americans in the '60s adopted a ''natural'' look, they now feel free to coif their heads any way they want. That 's cultural power.


 When one of Chris Rock’s young daughters asked, “Daddy, how come I don’t have good hair?,” the comedian decided to investigate the complex, often troubled relationship between African-American women and their crowning glory. He had no idea what he was in for.  Embarking on a journey that would take him from beauty shops in the United States to a Hindu temple in India, from a hair show in Georgia to a product-manufacturing plant in North Carolina, Mr. Rock unearthed a world of physical, financial and psychological hurt. But though “Good Hair” embraces the pain, digging gingerly into wounds both political and personal, the film feels more like a celebration than a lament. Spirited, probing and frequently hilarious, it coasts on the fearless charm of its front man and the eye-opening candor of its interviewees, most of them women — including the actress Nia Long and the hip-hop stars Salt-n-Pepa — and all of them ready to dish.  In fact, one of the happy consequences of “Good Hair” should be a radical increase in white-woman empathy for their black sisters. Whether in thrall to “creamy crack,” a scary, aluminum-dissolving chemical otherwise known as relaxer (what it’s really relaxing, observes Mr. Rock astutely, is white people), or the staggeringly expensive and time-consuming weave (often available on layaway plan), the women in the film bare heads and hearts with humor and without complaint.  For the Rev. Al Sharpton, though, that’s part of the problem. “We wear our economic oppression on our heads,” he says, wryly bemoaning the migration of the multibillion-dollar, black hair-products business from African-American to predominantly Asian manufacturers. Oppression takes on a darker hue, however, when the film travels to India to unearth the unwitting — and unremunerated — suppliers of all that weave- and wig-ready hair: poor, devout women who offer it to their priests in a religious ceremony known as tonsure.  Competently directed by Jeff Stilson, “Good Hair” employs humor as a medium for insightful and often uncomfortable observations on race and conformity. The film’s only misstep is its fixation on the competitors in a flamboyant Atlanta hair show. Far more entertaining are the barbershop conversations in which ordinary men jovially gripe about their honeys’ hairdos; they’re a brotherhood joined in financial commitment and — thanks to hands-off-the-head decrees at home — emotional frustration.  On a recent “Oprah Winfrey Show,” Mr. Rock ran his fingers excitedly through his host’s luxuriant, natural tresses, unloosed in honor of the visit. “I’ve never done that to a black woman!” he marveled, while Ms. Winfrey, who used to threaten to shave her head when she reached her 50th birthday, giggled delightedly: at that moment, she was just happy not to have followed through with her threat.  “Good Hair” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Chemical treatments and revolutionary sentiments.

Proving that no subject is too thin to yield a good documentary, "Good Hair" is a raucous and rigorous inquiry into the subject of African-American hair -- the stigmas, the secrets, the shocking price of maintenance -- that gets at universal but rarely discussed truths about black femininity. Chris Rock is in typically sharp but unusually sensitive form in this fresh, funny and altogether fascinating HBO project, which could prove a mildly provocative crowd-pleaser in theatrical release. Black audiences will wig out, but pic should also gel with viewers who have never even heard of a relaxer.
Rock set out to make the film in response to a question from one of his two young daughters -- "Daddy, how come I don't have good hair?" -- only to find that she's hardly the first one to pose the question. Working with comedian and first-time director Jeff Stilson (a scribe and co-producer on HBO's "The Chris Rock Show"), Rock interviews multiple subjects in an attempt to get to the root of the matter: the burden of being born with hair that, in its natural state, is considered "nappy" and unattractive by society at large.
Celebrities ranging from actresses Nia Long, Tracie Thoms and Raven Symone to writer Maya Angelou speak with remarkable candor about their hair and their willingness (or unwillingness) to conform to American standards of beauty. For legions of women, the use of a relaxer -- a thick lotion that straightens the natural curls -- is a major rite of passage, but also a potentially harmful one, a chemist explains, as relaxers contain a fair amount of scalp-burning, follicle-damaging sodium hydroxide.
Less dangerous but much more expensive is the weave -- the braiding of extensions into one's hair -- which can cost as much as $1,000. This fact provokes Rock to query his distaff subjects on all kinds of delicate hair-related issues: the degree to which a black woman views her hair as a major investment; her expectations that her significant other will fund her hair care; her sensitivity about having her hair touched, even as a sign of intimacy. Some of the answers are surprising, even revelatory.
It's telling that, with the exception of the Rev. Al Sharpton, who proudly flaunts his perm, Rock's subjects acknowledge that hair vanity is an almost exclusively female attribute. But to the comedian's credit, he doesn't let the guys off the hook, either, and an uproarious series of interviews with black male patrons at a barbershop brings the docu's battle-of-the-sexes subtext to the fore. There's something of a barbershop quality to "Good Hair," in the way Rock creates a lively public forum for people to riff with delightful frankness on subjects that seem more taboo than they should be.
Who knew hair could be such an inexhaustibly fertile topic? Rock visits the Atlanta-based Dudley family's hair-products empire, one of the foundations of the $9 billion black-hair-care industry. He jets to India, where Hindu women shave their heads as a form of sacrifice, only to have their shorn locks shipped overseas and turned into extensions for weave-hungry women.
He also spends a lot of time at the Bronner Bros. Intl. Hair Show, an annual hair-care convention in Atlanta. These segments, which bookend the pic, are a bit overextended, but an outrageous contest, pitting four leading stylists of black hair against each other, must be seen to be believed.

Don Imus 's 2007 remarks about "nappy-headed hos" underscored the immense fear of and fascination with the hair follicles of African-American women. Chris Rock , the host, co-writer, and co-producer of first-time director Jeff Stilson 's Good Hair , never mentions Imus's outburst; his interest in the political, social, and sexual entanglements of the tonsorial stems from the more personal—specifically, when one of his two young daughters plaintively asked, "Daddy, how come I don't have good hair?" Rock, affable as ever, queries a few black actresses (Nia Long  providing the most candid responses: "Weave sex is a little awkward"); visits beauty salons; oversees an experiment by a scientist who demonstrates the corrosive effects of sodium hydroxide, the main ingredient in hair relaxer; travels to Chennai , India, where women sacrifice hair that ends up in weaves costing thousands of dollars in the U.S.; and stares in disbelief at the Paris Is Burning –like competition at the annual Bronner Bros. –sponsored International Hair Show in Atlanta. Rock is certainly a sympathetic and curious observer, though including Ice-T 's remark that "a real pimp can tell what a woman looks like baldheaded" betrays some of the gender politics that remain vigorously unexamined in this breezy, superficial doc.
