 The story told in “Goodbye Solo,” Ramin Bahrani’s wonderful third feature, is moving and mysterious, and you may find yourself pondering its implications for a long time after the film’s simple and haunting final images have faded. But it all begins matter-of-factly enough with a conversation between a taxi driver and his passenger, who proposes an unusual business arrangement.  Solo (Souleymane Sy Savane), the driver, is a Senegalese man living in Winston-Salem, N.C., working and charming his way toward a share of the American dream. His demeanor is effortlessly warm and disarmingly friendly. He wears down resistance or suspicion with an incandescent smile and affectionate teasing: every male customer or colleague is “big dog”; the unseen and impatient female dispatcher is “pork chop.” Solo’s hardy, at times almost inexplicable optimism makes him a kindred spirit to Poppy, the London schoolteacher played by Sally Hawkins in Mike Leigh’s “Happy-Go-Lucky.”  And though Solo’s world — the nighttime streets and rough edges of a small American city — is in some ways more somber than Poppy’s, he too must face, largely within the confines of a moving car, a profound challenge to his sunny view of it. The man in the back seat in that first scene is William (Red West), a white Southerner at least 30 years older than Solo, who wants to arrange a trip to a place called Blowing Rock. It’s a long drive into the mountains, and William is offering a lot of money.  “What are you going to do, jump off?” Solo asks jokingly. William’s silent response unnerves him, even as it inaugurates the movie’s subtle and lucid exploration of a human connection that seems at once startlingly new — at least as a subject for a movie — and bracingly real.  Mr. Bahrani’s first two films, “Man Push Cart” (2005) and “Chop Shop” (2008), both take place in New York and focus on the struggles of immigrants to get by and get ahead. But while that description is accurate enough, it is also a little misleading. Mr. Bahrani is not interested in serving up warmed-over multicultural sentiment or in delivering lessons on social problems, nor in staging encounters between uptight, privileged white Americans and earthy, sensitive Others.  What he is after is at once more straightforward and intriguingly elusive. His motive seems to be a basic curiosity about what people do and how they live, and his method — placing nonprofessional actors (Mr. West, with a long television and movie career behind him, is an exception) in real-world settings and embedding them in small, powerful stories — allows for both a richly detailed sense of life and an intimation of unspoken meaning.  “Goodbye Solo” does note the particulars of Solo’s situation: his warm relationship with his stepdaughter, Alex (Diana Franco Galindo), and his more contentious dealings with her mother, Quiera (Carmen Leyva); his wary camaraderie with the drug dealers who use his services; his determination to become a flight attendant. But he is no more a case study than the grumpy, taciturn William, about whom we learn almost nothing. And while the temperamental differences between them could not be clearer, the film is grounded in their adamant, fine-grained individuality. It’s not interested in what they are like, but rather in who they are.  And this basic, bottomless question is more than enough to sustain a story that quietly and enthrallingly transcends its anecdotal beginnings. Mr. Bahrani (who wrote the script with Bahareh Azimi, his collaborator on “Chop Shop”) and his director of photography, Michael Simmonds (who also shot “Man Push Cart” and “Chop Shop”), coax a rough beauty out of Winston-Salem and its environs, capturing the lonely, slightly menacing feeling of a city at night. Solo’s good cheer is an antidote to this atmosphere, a way of filling the void that exists between people and beyond their strivings.  Mr. Bahrani and Mr. Simmonds create a mood that keeps us conscious of that emptiness, aware of the abyss that William appears to be seeking. Mr. West’s face, pouched and weary, makes a back story superfluous. And William’s reticence, more than his occasional show of warmth or generosity, provokes in Solo a defiant, insistent compassion. For some reason — it’s not clear that he understands it himself — Solo is driven not only to try to save William, but also to know him. And this, in turn, infuriates William, who at one point punches his would-be savior in the face.  That is not the only blow Solo absorbs, and it is not entirely unmerited. His decency can seem like a form of aggression, and it can make him look foolish as well as saintly. Mr. Bahrani has cited Roberto Rossellini’s “Flowers of Saint Francis” as an influence on “Goodbye Solo,” and while Solo is hardly without sin, he does seem at times to be in possession of a quality that can be described only as grace.  William has it too, but in a more melancholy form. The two men, though they seem to share a destination, in fact cross paths going in opposite directions. Solo, a fairly new arrival in a strange land, is working his way up and in, toward the bright promise not only of material comfort but also of belonging. William is in flight, seeking the outer edge of experience and the oblivion that lies beyond it.  What each one takes from the other is not spelled out and does not need to be. Because grace is also what defines Mr. Bahrani’s filmmaking. I can’t think of anything else to call the quality of exquisite attention, wry humor and wide-awake intelligence that informs every frame of this almost perfect film.

In this benign version of "Collateral," the only person a cabbie's passenger wants to kill is himself. Ramin Bahrani's brilliant follow-up to "Man Push Cart" and "Chop Shop" concerns a Senegalese taxi driver in Winston-Salem, N.C., and a taciturn old loner who hires the cabbie to drive him to his jumping-off point. Utterly engrossing dual-character study, unfolding with a serene disregard for indie quirkiness, "Goodbye Solo" radiates authenticity, as much in the town's unmistakable tobacco towers as in the characters' mindsets. Focused gem could ride strong critical support into arthouse release.
Subject inevitably echoes 
Abbas Kiarostami's "A Taste of Cherry." Myriad potential drivers uncomfortable with the idea of suicide are conflated in the figure of life-affirming cabbie Solo (Souleymane Sy Savane). Not accepting the death wish of his self-styled friend William (Red West), Solo assumes responsibility for the latter's fate, determined to turn his destiny around, despite the old man's angry resistance.
Soon Solo is taking William out for drinks and back to his house to sleep them off, much to the dismay of Solo's pregnant wife (Carmen Leyva) and the delight of his preteen stepdaughter (Diana Franco Galindo), who often joins them on their jaunts. Solo even finagles his way into sharing William's motel room, doing the man's laundry unasked, testing his pills behind his back and goading the old man into revealing details of his past. Though Solo's intentions are clearly altruistic, and his love of people infectious, it would not be difficult to imagine his meddlesome actions in a horror-film context.
The 34-year-old Solo has issues of his own. He's desperate to become a flight attendant, while his skeptical wife vehemently opposes this career move -- as does the drug dealer he sometimes chauffeurs, who hopes to make their relationship permanent.
Pic suffers none of the occasional awkwardness that plagued the narrative transitions in "Man Push Cart"; nor does it possess the fundamentally inaccessible otherness of milieu that detoured "Chop Shop." Instead, Bahrani has charted out a singular environment in the film's surprisingly funky Winston-Salem locale. The town, once seen as entirely insular, now claims a heterogeneous population that feels more comfortable among its dwindling tobacco fields than do curmudgeonly old-timers like William. If Solo reintroduces William to the seamier side of the city, William will inevitably lead Solo to his chosen termination point, Blowing Rock National Park, where it snows upside down and a branch thrown from the summit will return with the wind.
Pitch-perfect, charismatic thesping draws the viewer along unhesitatingly, with Michael Simmonds' raw, immediate lensing minimizing distinctions between inside and out.
Camera (color), Michael Simmonds; production designer, Chad Keith; sound (Dolby Digital), Tom Efinger. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (Horizons), Aug. 30, 2008. (Also in Toronto Film Festival -- Contemporary World Cinema.) Running time: 91 MIN.
 


At 73, the Memphis-born actor, stuntman, former U.S. Marine , and Golden Gloves  boxer Red West has the stoic, leathery repose of a barfly on a John Ford  or Howard Hawks  saloon wall. He doesn't talk much, and when he does, reveals even less, but there's an abyss of longing and hurt in every one of his sagging, distant gazes—the sort of face William Blake  may have had in mind when he asked, "What is the price of experience?" If West's name rings a bell, however, it probably has less to do with the more than 80 film and television credits he's amassed over a half-century in the business than with his off-screen supporting role as friend, driver, and bodyguard to high school classmate Elvis Presley . You can see West in the background of many Presley films, as well as his share of hard-living hillbilly classics (Walking Tall , Road House , et al.). Yet it's taken until now for him to snag a leading role, and the effect is like finding an old buffalo nickel in the recesses of a dusty bureau—its worth derived not from its assigned value, but from the places it has been and the hands it has passed through.
As William, a taciturn senior who seems to be planning for his final days, West takes center stage in Goodbye Solo , the third feature co-written and directed by Ramin Bahrani , who, at 34, has quietly emerged as one of the major figures in the American independent film scene. Bahrani's two previous films, the excellent Man Push Cart  (2005) and Chop Shop  (2007), were tightly wound, location-specific character studies, heavily influenced by the work of the Dardenne brothers, but with their own unfettered eye for immigrant workers living hand-to-mouth on the margins of New York City society. With Goodbye Solo , Bahrani broadens his focus—or at least shifts it south—to his hometown of Winston-Salem , North Carolina. His fundamental interest, however, remains unseen people, or people we might see and never think twice about: the push-cart vendor who sells us our morning coffee; the motherless youth handing out estimates at a Queens  body shop; an old man who wishes to die without leaving so much as a trace.
Bahrani possesses a disciplined sense of composition and form, a vision of the world that extends beyond the boundaries of his own navel, and the understanding that it is possible to make films about class and race in this country without pandering to the audience.
What's consistently remarkable about Bahrani's work is his steadfast refusal to peddle cheap sentiment or to mine for hope where there is none to be found. His favored locations are urban streets and businesses that emphasize his characters' sense of displacement, the notion that home is something enjoyed by other people. And while all of his films to date deal, to some extent, with entrepreneurial endeavors, it is not riches that Bahrani's ragged protagonists seek, but merely a finer quality of rags. In Goodbye Solo , the small-scale social climber is the title character (excellent newcomer Souléymane Sy Savané ), a Senegalese-born taxi driver who cruises the nighttime streets of Winston-Salem while training for a future career as a flight attendant, despite the disapproval of his pregnant Mexican wife (Carmen Leyva ), who wants him close to home. A chatty Solo picks up William as a fare, but finds his irrepressible good cheer lost on his passenger, who wants only to be dropped off at a nearby movie theater and picked up two hours later. Then William adds one more request: On a specified date in the near future, he wants the cabbie to drive him to the top of a local mountain, Blowing Rock , and leave him there—no questions asked.
In its premise and its many long driving scenes, Goodbye Solo  seems guaranteed to earn comparisons to Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami 's 1997 masterpiece Taste of Cherry , in which a similarly suicidal man drives the streets of Tehran  seeking a volunteer to throw dirt on his freshly dug grave. But while Bahrani is undoubtedly indebted to Kiarostami—and, as remakes go, this sort of thing is eminently preferable to Hollywood 's countless repackagings—the connection between the two films is less significant than it first appears. Whereas Kiarostami's driver and passengers remained isolated from one another in both formal and human terms, Goodbye Solo  is ultimately about the fragile but profound friendship that forms between these men as Solo becomes, in effect, William's funerary chauffeur. The more the driver tries to discern some meaningful details about his passenger's life, the more William retreats. So, too, does Bahrani hold his characters at some enigmatic distance from the audience, refusing to reveal all their secrets, mindful of the foolish notion that it is possible to truly "know" another person after 90 minutes of screen time. Finally, as at the end of every Bahrani film, we arrive at a place where a few poetic images say more than any words or facts possibly could: Dawn breaks, a car disappears into the morning mist, and life goes on.
