''The Gospel" opens, as a gospel movie should, in midshout. The choir of Atlanta's fictional New Revelations church tears into ''He Reigns," the camera bounces off the walls with joy, and the audience settles in to be uplifted.
What follows is a letdown: a heartfelt but muddled melodrama about an R&B singer's crisis of faith and the church politics that ensnare him when he goes home to visit his dying father. Dramatically simplistic and crowded with too many characters saddled with too many motivations, Rob Hardy's film is at its best when it just steps back and lets the voices rip. ''When you sing in the choir, it's called praise," one character reminds the hero, and the movie, simply, isn't praiseworthy enough.
It's smooth stuff for a while, if overly hyperactive during the musical numbers. After an opener establishing the young David Taylor's estrangement from his churchaholic pop, Pastor Fred (Clifton Powell of ''Ray"), ''The Gospel" jumps ahead 15 years to find David (Boris Kodjoe) transformed into an LA-based soul stud with a hit single, a happily avaricious manager (Omar Gooding), and a fan base of panting women. Returning home after a discreet phone call from a family friend alerts him to father's delicate condition, the prodigal son steps gingerly into the church's Sunday services and its back-office war of succession. The spirit moves him and so does that cute singer in the front row.
Her name is Rain, played by Tamyra Gray with enough fire and vocal chops to back up the grousing over her unceremonious booting from ''American Idol" a few seasons back. Certainly she has more going on than Kodjoe, who's as handsome and as dull as a painted god. The movie gives Rain an adorable daughter (China Anne McLain), an estranged husband (Dwayne Boyd), and a split-screen love montage with David -- anything to keep these two from falling into bed. This is a ministry movie, after all, and its faith, in people as well as the Lord, is a pleasant change of pace.
''The Gospel" keeps piling on the subplots, though. David's childhood pal is now the Reverend Frank (Idris Elba of HBO's ''The Wire"), an ambitious Bible-pounder who wants to lead New Revelations into the 21st century, with himself as its all-media star. Before going to his reward, Pastor Fred passes Frank the baton, angering his longtime number two (Donnie McClurkin) and setting the stage for David to take a more prominent role. Meanwhile, Frank's wife, Charlene (Nona Gaye), alternates between Lady Macbeth machinations and tearful outbursts over her inability to have a child.
A little character ambiguity is a good thing, but Hardy's screenplay is just confused; by the end, you're not sure how you're supposed to feel about any of these people other than that they're all good souls at heart. Nice message, problematic storytelling, and when ''The Gospel" brings on real-life gospel stars like Yolanda Adams and Fred Hammond, the sonic explosion is tinged with a sense of relief. The movie's worth seeing if you're moved by the music, but bring some patience, too. God's eye is on the sparrow when it should have been on the script.

         Rob Hardy's "The Gospel" is another solid entry in the burgeoning African American faith-based genre that favors inclusiveness over preachiness and presents multidimensional characters. Featuring a number of noted gospel singers, "The Gospel" is rousing, affirmative entertainment.
 
  Upon the death of his mother in 1992, David Taylor (Boris Kodjoe) turns his back on his workaholic Atlanta preacher father, Charles (Clifton Powell). Handsome and sexy, David becomes a rock star, and his "Let Me Undress You" is riding the top of the charts when he learns his father is terminally ill.
 


         






    David postpones a tour and heads home — into a hornet's nest. The church is in financial straits, and the assistant pastor (Donnie McClurkin) clashes with the senior Taylor's handpicked successor, the egotistical and ambitious Charles Frank (Idris Elba). Eager to save his father's church, David organizes a benefit gospel concert, but he is genuinely conflicted over what role he has to play in his father's church and its future. In the meantime he's drawn to the self-possessed choir singer Rain (Tamyra Gray).
 
  Of course, "The Gospel" offers positive solutions but never suggests it's easy for an individual to sort out his priorities in working toward salvation. "The Gospel" earns its emotional impact, and Kodjoe has a star's presence.
 
 "The Gospel,"
 Rated PG for thematic elements, including suggestive material and mild language.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 43 minutes. In general release.   


An ego-maniacal Baptist reverend and a sexy pop star who has drifted from his Christian roots stumble toward redemptions of a sort in "The Gospel," a creaky melodrama that wants to be a musical. Mimicking a traditional movie tuner, director Rob Hardy's script allows for plenty of gospel music to bridge the gaps in his slight drama centered around a struggling Atlanta church. Pic will find its target auds with families, Christian groups and gospel fans, especially in cities with solid African American congregants.
Already displaying his chops and charisma, young David (Michael J. Pagan) leads rapturous churchgoers in song and is planning to become a minister as is his pal Frank (Sean Nelson). When David's father, Bishop Taylor (Clifton Powell), arrives too late to be with his wife when she dies at a hospital, David lashes out at him and runs away. 
Fifteen years later (and, presumably, in the present), David (Boris Kodjoe) has become an R&B star with his sexy new hit, "Let Me Undress You," and has obviously flown far from his old Baptist flock, including dad.
Word that Bishop Taylor is ailing, however, brings David back home to Atlanta, where he finds a financially-troubled church with a gifted choir. Frank (Idris Elba), who has become a reverend and is set to inherit Taylor's ministry, is immediately resentful of David's sudden re-appearance and his use of his star power to help the church. To make Frank's life worse, wife Charlene (Nona Gaye) is infertile and feels uninspired to have sex. 
From the moment that David gives tips to the chorus, takes up with soloist Rain (Tamyra Gray) and arranges to produce a fund-raiser for the church, it's clear that the prodigal son is destined to return to the flock. It's just as obvious that Hardy's drama is intent on making the supposedly devout Frank the heavy, particularly after Taylor dies and Frank assumes leadership with all the self-inflated ego of a Jim Bakker. 
With visions of an evangelical empire dancing in his brain, Frank has an unerring ability for repelling everyone around him, from Charlene to church vet Minister Hunter (Donnie McClurkin). David has his own little dramas, involving a music deal gone bad and Rain's ex (Dwayne Boyd) suddenly showing up. 
But the passionately performed music numbers -- most written by Kirk Franklin and performed by a dynamic chorus under Keith Wilson's direction -- come along frequently enough to keep the increasingly awkward dramatics from sinking "The Gospel" altogether. As in a musical whose book is several miles behind its music and lyrics, the tunes provide some blessed breaks to let the movie breath a little.
Hardy tends to urge his thesps to push obvious emotional buttons, but Kodjoe goes for a subtler approach that makes him quite watchable. Powell, always a reliable supporting actor, holds up his end like a rock, while Elba indulges in bad-guy long stares.
Pic is undermined by a TV-scale look and Fernando Villena's senselessly hyperactive editing. In contrast to Franklin's genuine gospel, Stanley A. Smith's score verges on muzak.
