 Madeline Matheson (Jordan Ladd) is a vegan, baby-sling-wearing, animal-loving mom who wouldn’t hurt a fly. That is, until flies start gathering around her baby, Grace, who’s awfully pale and emits an odor even a mother can’t love.  “Grace” is also the title of this chilly and slow-moving horror film, which plays with ideas of mother love, obsessive child rearing and liberal spinelessness, adding a helping of trendy vampirism.  Ms. Ladd does admirably stoic work as a woman who insists on bringing her dead fetus to term and is rewarded with what appears to be a miracle but turns out to be a nightmare, especially when baby is hungry. While the writer and director, Paul Solet, keeps the on-screen violence to a minimum, he’s quite generous with the blood, much of it flowing from normally sacrosanct parts of the female anatomy.  Mr. Solet, who claims the “Hostel” meister Eli Roth as a mentor, is going for something psycho- and sociological in his first feature. While his story harks back to the tongue-in-cheek exploitation flick “It’s Alive,” the finished product plays like a mash-up of Roman Polanski’s two greatest creep-outs, “Rosemary’s Baby” and “Repulsion” (with a homage to Kathryn Bigelow’s vampire road movie, “Near Dark,” thrown in).  Mr. Solet does not possess anything close to Mr. Polanski’s storytelling or image-making skills, but with the help of his sound crew (four people are given sound design or editing credits), he keeps you on the edge of your seat, or perhaps the edge of fleeing the theater.

"Rosemary's Vegan Vampire Baby" would be a fine title for "Grace," a satirical creepfest that mines modern motherhood for all its latent terrors: Breastfeeding. Baby monitors. Mothers-in-law. Splatter freaks will suckle on "Grace's" high corpuscle count and others will laugh at the sendup of post-natal obsessiveness. But progressive parents beware: When the movie's besieged mom fixes her problem child a bottle filled with meat juice squeezed from plastic-wrapped beef roasts, you may just lose your mind. 
Madeline Matheson (Jordan Ladd) is first seen staring at the ceiling while having sex with her alternately dull and nasty husband Michael (Stephen Park). When, after Madeline gets pregnant, the couple visits midwife Patricia Lang (Samantha Ferris) -- who happens to be Madeline's ex-lover -- Michael is full of insulting questions. On the way home, road-hog Michael causes an accident that kills both himself and the unborn baby.
Or so we think: Insisting on carrying the fetus to term, Madeline -- and everyone else -- is stunned when the baby is born alive. But rather than being Mommy's little bundle of joy, little Grace turns out to be a nipple-gnawing malcontent who attracts flies.
Hitchcock was renowned for imbuing the most pedestrian object with dread and, while Solet certainly isn't pretending to be that subtle, he does bestow a sense of crawling tension upon the most benign, or even beneficent, subject -- hospitals, doctors, airbags, tofu, animal-oriented cable TV, a cat, a package of liver. It's both hilarious and politically piquant.
Madeline might have been able to rear little Grace if not for her mother-in-law Vivian (Gabriella Rose), who refers to Madeline as "that woman my son married," and who is intent on wresting Grace away. Enlisting her own feckless Dr. Sohn (Malcolm Stewart) to declare Madeline incompetent, Vivian starts lactating herself in anticipation of getting the baby.
In the showdown between mother and mother-in-law, the proceedings are peppered with spasm of violence that are alternately sick-funny and downright chilling, but don't cancel out the intelligence, or at least drollery, with which so much of the film is put together. The cast, Ferris, Ladd and Rose specifically, play it with tongues planted firmly in cheek. Squeamish-making script by Solet treats its aud's sense of propriety the way a baby treats a diaper.
Production values are good, but the baby-doll stand-ins can be pretty obvious.

A muddled, logic-starved provocation, Grace  avoids smugness by refusing to play its body horror for shits and giggles, but its resonance is purely atmospheric. Miscarriage-plagued Madeline (Jordan Ladd) decides to carry her latest child to term after losing it during a car accident that also kills her dullard of a husband, who goes bizarrely unmissed even by his own mother. Through sheer determination (a/k/a screenwriter contrivance), Madeline wills her baby to life, except little should-be-stillborn Grace, who transforms mommy's breasts into a bloody war zone after only a few feedings, appears to be only half-alive given her low temperature, putrid body odor, and kinship to flies. Soon—perhaps naturally—the blood from organic supermarket meat (and from a surgeon who pays house calls) ends up in the tyke's glass bottles after the hospital-averse Madeline diagnoses her as being protein-deprived. Creepy, yes, but what's the point of all of this bratty, poignance-free bloodletting? If the references to Madeline's past sex life and finicky diet are any indication, perhaps writer-director Paul Solet's only point is to warn us of the dangers of lesbian vegans aiming their breasts at the mouths of babes.
