         Begging for approval like a puppy at the pound, the romantic comedy "Gray Matters" gets by, at least for a while, on a certain amiable awkwardness. First-time writer-director Sue Kramer piles on tried-and-true tropes as if she's just come from Nora Ephron's garage sale. Bubbly blond heroine? Check. Old movie references? Got 'em. As the camera tracks down trendy TriBeCa streets, you half-expect it to turn a corner and reveal another crew shooting an identical movie.
 
  Heather Graham, her eyes frozen, saucer-like, in a look of perpetual befuddlement, plays Gray, an indecisive Manhattan ad exec whose love life is stuck in neutral. Perhaps it's the fact that she spends all her free time with her equally single brother, Sam (Tom Cavanagh), or the fact that they're so close they're frequently mistaken for a couple. Or perhaps her dithering has deeper roots. When she's asked to choose a wine, Gray sputters, "I'll have red. I'll have white. I'll have both." It's not Laurence Olivier and Tony Curtis discussing oysters and snails, but you get the drift.
 


         






    Gray's terminally blurry life snaps into focus when her brother meets Charlie (Bridget Moynahan), a gamine beauty who quickly sweeps him off his feet. Within hours of their first date, they're engaged, and days later, they're in Las Vegas tying the knot, with Gray as shellshocked witness. It's bad enough that she's losing her brother, best friend and roommate in one fell swoop (not to mention their cavernous rent-controlled apartment), but when Gray and Charlie's prenuptial night on the town ends with a passionate kiss, the few certainties left in her life come crashing to the ground. Gray, you see, is gay. "Like Gray," she babbles, "without the 'r.' "
 
  Kramer's script is full of such clunkers. Musing aloud on the awkwardness of her first same-sex kiss, Gray jabbers, "I feel inhuman. I feel like E.T. I should phone home. But if I phoned home, Sam would answer, and that wouldn't be good." Truer words were never mangled.
 
  Drawing on their sitcom chops, Graham and Cavanagh cover for their cloth-eared dialogue with trumped-up camaraderie, pushing and pulling at each other like toddlers in playgroup. Their mildly creepy attachment would be fertile ground for any therapist, but Gray is saddled with a quirky headshrinker (Sissy Spacek) who holds sessions in bowling alleys and climbing ranges.
 
  No more helpful, or better served by his material, is Alan Cumming's lovelorn cabby, a wind-up advice dispenser whom Kramer sticks in a dress when the going gets slow. At least Molly Shannon gets in a few licks as Gray's brassy coworker. After one particularly exercised rant, she exclaims, "Spewing is wonderful!" And tempting to follow suit.
 
  Technically speaking, "Gray Matters" is a coming-out movie, but Kramer shows zero feeling for the nuances of a midlife sexual awakening. Apart from a warp-speed monologue musing on such topics as public hand-holding and death benefits, the movie stops at the first-date stage. Its vagueness is hard to fathom, since there are better-informed coming-out comedies on the market at any given instant.
 
  Kramer manages a few memorable moments, such as Gray and Charlie's leggy mimicry of the "I Won't Dance" number from the 1946 MGM musical "Till the Clouds Roll By," performed in sync with the original as it plays on a background TV. But the juxtaposition just underlines the distinction between thrice-digested movie magic and the real McCoy.
 
  "Gray Matters." MPAA rating: PG-13 for some mature thematic material, sexual content and language. Running time: 1 hour, 32 minutes. Exclusively at AMC/Loews Broadway, 1441 Third Street Promenade, Santa Monica (310) 458-1506 #706; Laemmle's Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd. (323) 848-3500.   

 A screwball comedy with a lesbian twist: if that sounds familiar it is because “Gray Matters” is the second such movie, following “Puccini for Beginners,” to open in New York in less than a month. Is it coincidence or a minitrend?  Both films were written and directed by women (“Gray Matters” by Sue Kramer and “Puccini” by Maria Maggenti); both contemplate fluctuating sexual orientation. In “Puccini” the gay antiheroine goes bi, then backtracks; in “Gray Matters” the suppressed lesbian desires of a woman who has assumed she is straight are awakened by an impulsive kiss. Both stories are romantic triangles in which a straight, nonmacho Cary Grant surrogate remains blissfully ignorant of the games being played by beautiful women behind his back.  And both movies pretend to be high-end French Champagne, but are really midpriced domestic vintages. If “Gray Matters” is more effervescent and has a drier taste, it is also far more detached from reality. Its lovingly photographed portrait of upscale Manhattan may look familiar, but this strangely deracinated Gotham feels like New York in an alternate universe.  The principal characters, Gray (Heather Graham), an advertising copywriter, and Sam (Tom Cavanagh), an up-and-coming heart surgeon, are an attractive, perky brother-sister combo whose sibling bond is so tight they like to finish each other’s sentences. In their spare time they do Fred-and-Ginger routines for their friends’ amusement (the first song  we hear is “Cheek to Cheek”) and chatter fatuously about old movies. The spirit of Carole Lombard hovers over the film;  in this world,  Madonna never existed.  Gray and Sam’s perfect relationship begins to curdle when they decide to show the world they’re not co-dependent by finding marital partners for each other.  They begin making checklists of the essential qualities  of an ideal mate,  like Sam’s demand for a woman who is not afraid to eat a hot-fudge sundae.  Presto: they discover Sam’s dream girl one sunny afternoon in Central Park in the person of Charlotte, a k a Charlie (Bridget Moynahan), a gorgeous new arrival from the West Coast who works at an aquarium and studies the homosexual behavior of fish. After the three spend a blissful day together swapping movie trivia, Sam, obviously smitten, dismisses Gray and vanishes with Charlie into the night.  When he reappears the next morning in the splendid loft he shares with his sister, he announces that Charlie is The One and that they are flying to Las Vegas to get married. Gray, the designated maid of honor, is not as pleased as she should be.  After a drunken girls’ night out in Vegas  —  during which they join Gloria Gaynor onstage to sing “I Will Survive” —  Charlie and Gray return to the hotel and fall into a  steamy kiss. Charlie, the drunker of the two, has no memory of the clinch the next morning. Gray, jolted to her core, is now madly in love.  If “Gray Matters” follows the standard screwball comedy format, the two halves of its hybrid style — part early ’40s romp, part “The L Word” lite — don’t mesh. Compared to “Gray Matters,” even a Nora Ephron bonbon has the weight of urban neo-realism.  Ms. Graham’s Gray may be fetching, but she tries so strenuously to charm that her ditziness begins to pall. Mr. Cavanagh’s Sam is a suaver, blander version of his former television character Ed, from the show of the same name; you can’t imagine him wielding a scalpel. Sissy Spacek is wasted in the minor role of Gray’s therapist. As Gray’s cheerfully self-effacing office sidekick, Carrie, a type originated on “The Bob Cummings Show” by Ann B. Davis, Molly Shannon throws in a dash of ’50s sitcom zest.  Stealing every scene in which he appears, Alan Cumming twinkles and grins as a wise, friendly cab driver besotted with Gray. He is such a good sport that even after she rejects him, he dresses in drag to accompany her on her first excursion to a lesbian bar.  “Gray Matters” is rated  PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has racy talk.

Neo-screwball comedy with a major gay twist, "Gray Matters" suffers from the bright artificiality that afflicts many Nora Ephron-type Gotham romances while lacking Ephron's solid genre templates. Chockfull of forced (and oddly fake) '40s movie references, but supplemented with more authentic-seeming sitcom tropes, scripter/helmer Sue Kramer's awkward freshman outing eventually coasts on the genuine charm of its leads. A strong vehicle for Heather Graham, who has never looked lovelier, "Gray" scores most convincingly in its reinvention of Carole Lombardian sexual screwiness as head-spinning gender confusion. Pic is skedded to open in February, and thesps' grace may outweigh script's ungainliness for modest B.O. return. 
Well-matched dancers Gray (Graham) and Sam (Tom Cavanagh) sweep across a makeshift ballroom with so much infectious enthusiasm that it is hard to believe they are brother and sister. The two, who share eclectic tastes in '40s movies and a raft of experiences, wind up falling for the same woman, Charlie (Bridget Moynahan) -- providing Gray with her first inkling that she is gay.
As Sam struggles with unexpected jealousy and the flustered Gray flies off every which way in search of her sexual orientation, Charlie remains blithely unaware of the tensions swirling around her.
Pic revels in sprightly exchanges between the siblings, Graham and Cavanagh displaying a light, fanciful touch for comic timing. Unfortunately, their overlapping dialogue as supplied by Kramer is stronger on concept than execution, sometimes leaving the actors to juggle leaden conceits.
Scenes between the two women fare somewhat better, particularly Graham's and Moynahan's leggy swingtime pas de deux
 to the "I Won't Dance" number from "Till the Clouds Roll By," imitatively intercut with Van Johnson and Lucille Bremer's hoofing on the TV set behind them. But '40s movies, like the film posters for non-existent titles on the walls of Gray's improbable dream apartment (alibied as "rent-controlled"), or the myriad iconic shots of the Empire State building, seem like artifacts imported wholesale from other retro-minded films that reference classical Hollywood, with little heartfelt connection.
Kramer's setups and rhythms owe more to sitcom. Graham and Cavanaugh, both recent multi-episode veterans of "Scrubs," pick up on various character traits and quirks of line-delivery developed there. While the Cavanaugh character's work as a surgeon stays largely off-screen, the supporting players who constellate around Graham -- Sissy Spacek in the thankless role of Gray's clueless shrink, Alan Cumming as a scene-stealing cabbie, and Molly Shannon as an aggressively self-assured sidekick to Gray's diffident ad agency exec -- read more as a TV "family" than as any studio-bred stable of offbeat character actors.
Gray's final "outing," accidentally transmitted over computer to her entire office, recalls Ellen DeGeneres' famed, funnily inadvertent over-the-mic admission of lesbianism in her milestone "out-of-the-closet" sitcom episode.
In re-imagining the screwball comedy as a gay coming-to-consciousness farce, Kramer safely mainstreams her heroine through small-screen methodology. The camera never strays far from Graham, who, decked out in well-fitted outfits that make the most of her anything-but-boyish figure, sweetly leavens her heroine's ditzy sexual confusion without trivializing or overly normalizing it.
Camera (color, HD), John S. Bartley; editor, Wendey Stanzler; music, Andrew Hollender; production designers, Linda Del Rosario, Richard Paris; costume designer, Sheila Bingham; sound (Dolby Digital), Eric Lamontagne; choreographer, A.C. Ciulla; casting, Amanda Mackey, Cathy Sandrich. Reviewed at Hamptons Film Festival, Oct. 21, 2006. Running time: 96 MIN.
 


Heather Graham  seems resigned to mugging and shrugging out the remainder of her thirties through a series of undercooked romantic comedies. Too old for the edgy ingenue and yet too weirdly youthful to pull on the mom jeans, Graham, her early potential (and ability to transcend luscious looks) squandered, has strapped on the stilettos and reported for duty in Sue Kramer 's execrable New York coming-out film. After admitting to her creepily co-dependent brother (Tom Cavanagh ) that she is in love with his new bride (Bridget Moynahan ), and being outed to her entire office in a bit lifted almost directly from Ellen , "Gray" (previously a hopeless singleton despite her fantasy-blonde status) dissolves into hysterics. She'll never get married now! People will stare! It's an obstacle course of emoting that would be a stretch even for champion mugger Drew Barrymore . Coming from the strangely vacuous Graham, in a Manhattan this preposterous, the staid social message is as ludicrous as its surroundings.
