Far from being just one more among a recent plethora of documentaries whose makers wish to expose alternative truths about the war in Iraq, Foulkrod's film instead airs some of the hard-won truths learned by American soldiers from experience. The film, whose focus is more on the U.S. military's disingenuousness during the enlistment and reintegration phases of these volunteers' service, is recommended for anyone considering a stint in any military branch. The film's subjects are all gung-ho enlistees, who truly wanted to "be all that they can be," get college scholarship money, learn a trade, see the world, or serve their country. Their aims were all true, which makes the letdowns they experience that much more tragic. Several points are made about how the word "kill" is never used by recruiting officers and how no one ever warns of the dehumanization process that factors into the boot-camp training or the difficulties of returning to civilian life. One man uses the metaphor of cigarette packages that carry a surgeon general's warning about smoking being harmful to one's health and suggests that military recruitment carry similar warnings. They learn too late that good soldiers generally make bad civilians because the survival instincts required for each are incompatible. The first-person testimonies are powerful and affecting, and even more distressing are the voices of returning veterans who feel betrayed by a government that unleashes them on their families and society to reintegrate without equipping them with the necessary tools to succeed. "Psychological injury is this war's Agent Orange," says one, as firsthand reports mount of the Veteran Administration's callous treatment of soldiers suffering the various effects of post-traumatic stress disorder. Despite the stark power of these veterans' words, The Ground Truth
 is rather scattered in its presentation, never elucidating a continuous narrative line or argument. Still, the accumulation of testimony here is overwhelming, especially because these accounts come from people for whom these discoveries are true revelations. A pre-recruitment screening of Full Metal Jacket
 also might have proved revelatory. Short of that, it would be a good idea to show Foulkrod's movie nationwide on high school career days. (A Q&A with Iraq war veterans will follow the 7:30pm screening on Friday, Sept. 15, at the Dobie. Present will be Dave Bills, chairman of the Austin chapter of Iraq Veterans Against the War; Hart Viges, member of Iraq Veterans Against the War; and Perry Jefferies, volunteer veterans coordinator for Operation Truth.)


There are two moments in ``The Ground Truth" when the film's unforgiving spotlight suddenly shines out at the audience sitting in the dark. One is when former US Army specialist Robert Acosta, maimed in the leg and minus a hand, tells of conversations with civilians since his return to the States.
``How'd you lose your hand?" someone will ask. ``The war." ``What war?" ``Iraq." Pause. ``That still going on?"
The other sound bite is less damning, more of a personal challenge, and it comes when ex- US Army Reserve specialist Aidan Delgado simply says, ``Americans want to honor vets with yellow stickers rather than listening
 to them."
``The Ground Truth" listens. Directed by Patricia Foulkrod but really written by the men and women whose tours of duty it describes, this short, sharp documentary is not about George Bush or left/right politics or 9/11. It's not even really about the war in Iraq. It's about the US soldiers who are fighting that war: why they went, what they saw, how they feel when they come back.
Of all the recent films on the subject -- and they have been many and worthy -- this may be the most necessary to audiences at home. ``The Ground Truth" is the documentary any American with an opinion on our involvement in Iraq owes it to his or her conscience to see.
Foulkrod interviews more than a dozen veterans and structures the film chronologically. We hear why they enlisted -- Kelly Dougherty wanted help paying for school, Acosta wanted a future, Rob Sarra saw ``Top Gun" in eighth grade and fell in love with the military. The hypocrisies of the recruiting machinery are explored, as are the calculated humiliations of basic training; there's nothing particularly new here, although your heart may sink when someone recalls a march cadence about ``killing babies."
The purpose is to build ``a sustained desire to kill," in the words of one of the soldiers, and ``The Ground Truth" does offer the insight that video simulations have greatly increased training efficiency in the years since W orld W ar II and Vietnam. ``The software has changed dramatically," says one expert, which to one of the vets translates as ``You've seen the movie: You pull the trigger, the man drops."
Then they're shipped to Iraq, where the relevant contrasting quote would be one vet's muttered ``When you have to put a bullet in a woman and the woman's pregnant, it messes with you." This section is the core of ``The Ground Truth," and it is scalding. The video footage Foulkrod has gathered from in-country grips you from the start, and the violence is pitiless toward aggressors and victims on both sides. We watch an aerial heat-vision shot of a street crowd of Iraqis bombed into jelly, while an off-camera soldier says in shock and awe, ``Oh, dude
."
``The Ground Truth" depicts a chaotic, undersupported American presence while giving the lie to assertions that Iraqi civilian deaths are minimal. ``You don't go to war in a country and not go to war with its people," says former US Marine Charles Anderson. Others talk of being shot at by unseen gunmen and taking out every local in sight in response. ``It works; it's efficient," says ex-Marine corporal Sean Huze. In the most harrowing anecdote, Sarra describes shooting an approaching woman and only afterward finding the white flag in her hand. No one wins: The woman loses her life, Sarra loses his soul.
In the film's final third, Foulkrod brings her warriors, mangled in mind and body, home to a country that doesn't want to know. The ex-soldiers speak eloquently of their battles with inner demons while wives, girlfriends, and family members talk of being on the outside of people they once knew intimately. The parents of Marine Reservist Jeffrey Lucey describe the changes in their son, who returned from Iraq in late 2003 and hung himself six months later. On his bed he left the dog tags of two unarmed Iraqi soldiers he said he had shot.
``As Vietnam was Agent Orange, this war will be psychological injury," says one voice here, and the fractures of post-traumatic stress disorder are everywhere in evidence -- except to the Department of Defense, which labels it a ``personality disorder" or a symptom of bipolarity. The film's indignation only rises as the men and women describe the Veteran Administration's bureaucratic stonewalling and denial. When Jimmy Massey, a 12-year Marine Corps veteran, expressed regret for killing people in Iraq, he was labeled a conscientious objector by a VA psychiatrist.
``The Ground Truth" is straightforward filmmaking, and it has no interest in art. Foulkrod gussies up her format with a few montages set to tunes by the Roots and Mos Def, but they're not needed. At a mere 74 minutes, the film is epic in scope and in dismay. The implicit challenge, of course, is to its audience: How do you feel about this? What, if anything, are you going to do about it? Hug a veteran? Buy another ribbon magnet for the minivan? Something more?
You could pretend that what ``The Ground Truth" shows and tells doesn't exist, but the film makes it extremely difficult. ``There is nothing honorable about what we did," says a returned National Guardsman. The issue isn't that some veterans feel that way. The issue is that even one does.

         Like a recurring nightmare that haunts us in ever-changing forms, the war in Iraq has called forth a compelling series of documentaries — "Gunner Palace," "Occupation: Dreamland," the current "Iraq for Sale," the Sundance-winning but still unreleased "Iraq in Fragments," among many others — that tell us what is going on in that agonized country with more depth and immediacy than any other medium has managed.
 
 What continues to be remarkable is not only that documentaries keep coming out but that each of them manages to be different than those that came before, illuminating aspects of that benighted situation that haven't previously come to light. The newest, Laura Poitras' "My Country, My Country" and Patricia Foulkrod's "The Ground Truth," are two of the best.
 


         






   These films echo the previous Iraq work in that each was put together by a passionate director whose single-minded devotion to the subject was what got the film made. Also, each of these films exemplifies one of the two main categories of Iraq docs: Poitras' film shows what the war has been like for the Iraqis, while Foulkrod concentrates with equal heartbreak on the personal traumas U.S. soldiers have to deal with when they return home.
 
 Poitras says "My Country, My Country" was "motivated by a sense of despair." Determined to see the war's "contradictions from the perspective of the people living them," she worked alone in Iraq for more than eight months, getting close enough to the situation to show what being a civilian in a war zone really means.
 
 Eight months with any family will lead to intimacy, but Poitras was especially fortunate in the Iraqi she connected with, a man who exemplifies many of the contradictions of his country. And her time frame, the months leading to Iraq's January 2005 elections, was also fortuitous.
 
  Dr. Riyadh, married with six children, is a committed physician who runs a clinic in a Sunni neighborhood of Baghdad. He is a deeply religious man who feels that Islam offers people more justice than any secular system. Yet he believes strongly in democracy and is one of the Iraqi Islamic Party's candidates for Baghdad's City Council.
 
 What's most striking about what we hear from the sophisticated, educated Dr. Riyadh, just the kind of man who should be at least neutral about the U.S., is how angry and frustrated he is about the American occupation. Talking to a friend on the phone about a recent shooting in his neighborhood, he comments witheringly about these "fruits of democracy." And talking to angry prisoners at Abu Ghraib, he snaps in irritation, "We are an occupied country with a puppet government, what do you expect?"
 
  Because she worked alone, Poitras was also able to gain a kind of backstage access to the upcoming elections, which the Americans seem to view at least in part as a show that needs good reviews. We see a concerned military briefer worrying about the reactions of what he calls "Joe Reasonable Iraqi," and we witness the workings of a plainclothes Australian security film, brought in because it simply wouldn't look good to have too many American uniforms around election sites.
 
 What "My Country, My Country" does best is show us that while both the Americans and the Iraqis care about the country's future, their cultural backgrounds and world views inevitably make them seem alien to each other. We see that an occupation is inevitably oppressive, and though they are trying to help, U.S. soldiers by the very nature of their presence come off as intrusive and arrogant.
 
 Some of this same feeling comes through from the U.S. soldiers' point of view in "The Ground Truth." As one returning veteran tells filmmaker Foulkrod, "occupation is a situation of dominance, it's the day-to-day reality of behaving abusively. Killing is just the icing on the cake."
 
  But what is especially interesting about "The Ground Truth" is that it takes some pains to avoid as much as possible talk about whether we should have troops on the ground. This thoughtful, sensitive film, perhaps the most emotionally wrenching of all the Iraq documentaries, could have been made after any war.
 
 Using extensive interviews with returning Iraq and some Vietnam veterans, "The Ground Truth" investigates an unspoken reality that society has never been comfortable acknowledging: What the military does, plain and simple, is teach people to kill.
 
 How that's done, and what happens to those trained killers when they come home and face the truth of the dictum "If you're a good soldier you'll be a bad civilian" is what this film is about.
 
 It all starts with the recruiting process, with emphasis placed on benefits such as college tuition, seeing the world and serving your country. "The killing, the bloody business of the military," says returning soldier Aidan Delgado, "they downplay that."
 
 Next comes basic training and its effectiveness in breaking recruits down, a technique, says Lt. Col. David Grossman, that attempts to make killing a conditioned reflex because experience from World War II demonstrated that "humans are reluctant to kill their own kind."
 
 Once in a combat zone where it is difficult to tell friend from foe, the soldiers in "Ground Truth" find that their training has led them to actions they have difficulty living with and even have a hard time talking about on camera.
 
 One man describes killing a woman who was reaching for a white flag; another explains the technique of blanketing an area with gunfire, killing the innocent along with the guilty, while Marine Staff Sgt. Jimmy J. Massey talks of official indifference to widespread killing of civilians. "This isn't," the nine-year veteran says, "the Marine Corps I signed up for."
 
 Even if they leave the service physically unharmed, these men find that, as Marine Cpt. Sean Huze says, "who we are when we return is not who we were when we left. We all become casualties of war." Friends and family are often ill-equipped to deal with the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and, several veterans report, the Department of Defense is often reluctant to accept responsibility.
 
 Because, like "My Country's" Poitras, director Foulkrod made sure to spend considerable time with her subjects, the resulting candor leads to stories and situations that will surely cause tears. By the time "The Ground Truth" is over, no one will doubt the quotation from psychologist James Hillman that starts the film: "The return from the killing field is more than a debriefing. It is a slow ascent from hell."
 
 *
 
 'My Country, My Country'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 A Zeitgeist Films release. Director-cinematographer Laura Poitras. Producers Poitras,
 
 Jocelyn Glatzer. Editors Erez Laufer, Poitras. Running time: 1 hour, 30 minutes.
 
 In selected theaters.
 
 *
 
 'The Ground Truth'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for disturbing violent content, and language
 
 A Focus Features release. Director-producer Patricia Foulkrod. Cinematographer Reuben Aaronson. Editor Rob Hall. Running time: 1 hour, 18 minutes.
 
 Exclusively at Landmark's NuArt, 11272 Santa Monica Blvd., West L.A. (310) 281-8223.   

 Amid the continuing deluge of documentaries about the war in Iraq, Patricia Foulkrod’s film “The Ground Truth” stands out as an especially pointed indictment of the American military’s treatment of its own people on and off the battlefield.  The film also addresses deeper questions about modern methods of creating efficient soldiers and their long-term consequences. It asks: how could anyone imagine that the intensive molding of human beings into killing machines wouldn’t affect the rest of their lives? The film’s 10 main talking heads (9 men and 1 woman from various socioeconomic backgrounds) agree that that kind of radical personality change, once instilled, can’t be reversed as easily as turning off a faucet.  “The Ground Truth” proceeds swiftly from scenes of recruitment in Venice, Calif., to a Marine Corps boot camp, to the killing fields of Iraq, to the home front. The scenes in which recruits are regaled with promises of the benefits of service, without any mention of killing, aren’t all that surprising. How could a volunteer wartime army be mustered any other way? But there is a difference between misleading advertising and outright lying. One National Guardsman dispatched to Iraq recalls being promised that he would never see combat.  The scenes in boot camp will also surprise no one who has seen “Full Metal Jacket” or “Jarhead,” in which personalities are broken down and reconstructed through systematic humiliation, deprivation and depersonalization.  The movie comes to a boil with its firsthand stories of combat. One soldier after another recalls being encouraged by senior officers not to distinguish between civilians and the enemy. The film’s most gung-ho marine, who went to Iraq for the thrill of combat, recalls his personal turning point: when he killed an Iraqi woman who was approaching his tank only to discover afterward that she was clutching a white flag. Another tells of being screamed at by an Iraqi civilian carrying his brother’s head, which had just been blown off.  But the film’s most disheartening testimony comes from soldiers  who returned from Iraq emotionally and mentally shattered only to encounter resistance when seeking treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder. One tells of being dismissed by a counselor with the words, “We don’t treat ‘conscientious objectors,’ ” after he voiced his anguish at having killed innocent civilians. These collected stories portray the Defense Department and the Veterans Administration as understaffed, underfinanced agencies responding with a shocking indifference to the needs of those who have served honorably.  “The Ground Truth,” which was made in association with several antiwar veterans organizations, including Iraq Veterans Against the War, tries to do too much in too little time. It would be a stronger film if it devoted more detailed attention to the plight of the returning veteran. As it stands, it is a scattershot antiwar polemic that doesn’t bolster its arguments with any historical perspective or statistical evidence. No one from the government or the military is trotted out to give an opposing view.  This is not to say that  “The Ground Truth,” on its own terms, isn’t devastating. There’s nothing sadder than to hear a disabled, disillusioned soldier, his life in ruins, wondering what he was fighting for.  “The Ground Truth”  is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity.

Presenting scathing testimony from Iraq War vets and a palpable anger about the plight of American service people, "The Ground Truth: After the Killing Ends" will likely have difficulty securing a broadcast or cable niche. Look for limited theatrical and a vigorous life on DVD, especially if producer director Patricia Foulkrod follows the Robert Greenwald model of political niche marketing. 
"Ground Truth" asserts that the U.S. military, in an era of cuts in manpower, equipment and health care, has neither the interest nor inclination to deal with the human wreckage it creates -- and that Iraq is creating more volatile wreckage than any war in our history.
As one of the pic's subjects explains, the U.S. military's aim with new recruits is to make them capable of taking human life when they're "not in a state of rage." And that psychological manipulation, along with the number of civilians killed by U.S. forces, is making the post-traumatic stress aspect of the Iraq War more severe than ever.
Foulkrod has astounding footage, the most disturbing of which she says she gleaned from the Internet, and from soldiers who wanted to share it: A cluster of computer images, for example, each represents Iraqi civilians blown to bits via a remote rocket launch. 
A soldier tells his first-hand story of killing an Iraqi woman who was approaching a tank, only to find later she was carrying a white flag. The remorse felt by Foulkrod's subjects is palpable. Had she obtained some counterarguments from the military, the film would have had more balance and more heft.
Among other aspects that hamper the pic are the musical interludes, which trivialize the grave mood, and several interviews that reiterate points already made.
But the substance of the movie is potent, and so powerfully presented by those who have fought and are still fighting a controversial war, that the message of "Ground Truth" cannot be dismissed.
Camera (color, DV), Reuben Aaronson; editor, Rob Hall; music, Dave Hodge; musical supervisors, Kevin Dowling, Robbie Adams; sound, Sam Lehman. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 22, 2006. Running time: 72 MIN. 

 


The newest activist doc from Iraq , joining a deafening yowl of media dissent, Patricia Foulkrod 's The Ground Truth  gets its voice entirely from returned combat vets. It begins as a new-millennium Full Metal Jacket , analyzing the conscientious strategy of recruiters, trainers, and upper brass to transform naive and/or jobless American kids into raghead-hating, gun-toting murderers. The details are eye-opening (or ear-opening, in the case of marching songs taught to the new Marines  about slaughtering Arab schoolchildren), but soon Foulkrod's film backs itself into a Support Our Troops corner, elegizing the soldiers, many with missing limbs and almost all with post-traumatic stress, as they recount being indoctrinated, killing civilians (an everyday occurrence), feeling guilt, and suffering at home as the federal military machine reneges on disability checks and services. Iraqis do not figure in, except as bad memories. Claiming "We're all casualties" seems an act of whiny hubris (for the film, if not the PTSD Marine who said it), because Iraqis, butchered in their homes by the tens of thousands, would surely prefer depression and weeping in their wives' arms at night to having their families and neighborhoods annihilated.
