
By far the most powerful moment in ``The Guardian" comes at the end, when Kevin Costner drops Ashton Kutcher on the runway in front of Ashton's private jet. Things between them had been rough, what with Ashton's diva-driven tantrums and Kevin's stoic determination to keep his famous client safe from the crazed killer hired to blow him up -- at the Oscars
. The airport scene is their goodbye. Ashton, wearing a head scarf that whips in the breeze, thanks Kevin for saving him. Kevin walks away. He hasn't gotten too far, when Ashton calls out after him, running down the steps, along the jetway, and into Kevin's arms, while on the soundtrack Ashton's version of Dolly Parton's --
All right, you caught me. Ashton Kutcher does not wear a head scarf in ``The Guardian." And even though Kevin Costner gives the same performance, the movie is not a redo of ``The Bodyguard." But at 135 minutes, it's about as emotionally runny.
``The Guardian" tells us what it takes to make it as a Coast Guard rescue swimmer. (Or tries to, since I'm still not really sure. Lots of crunches?) The Coast Guard is an indispensable arm of the American military that gets no love from the movies -- it's all Army, Navy, Marines, all the time. As one guardsman puts it, ``We're Coast Guard. Nobody really appreciates us till they need us." If only the appreciation didn't take so long, and weren't so dull.
Kutcher is Jake Fischer, one of a handful of aspiring rescue swimmers. Costner is Ben Randall, the grizzled legend who takes an instructor's job after he loses his entire team in a storm. Ben has survivor's guilt, post-traumatic stress, and a crumbling marriage.
 Sela Ward plays the wife, and in a movie career littered with thankless wife parts, this is surely her most thankless yet.
Since he's played by Kutcher, Jake is a knucklehead. Obviously the most talented recruit, he's also the cockiest. On his first day of training, he vows to smash all Ben's old swimming records. Ben reciprocates with unorthodox drills, demanding that his students spend extended sessions treading water and prolonged time in a tank at below-freezing temperatures.
Screenwriter Ron L. Brinkerhoff gives Jake a bland local teacher (Melissa Sagemiller) to dote on, then disappoint, and a three-time flunkee (Brian Geraghty) to motivate. But we never get a reasonable psychological profile of a rescue swimmer. What draws a person to such a tough job? If you believe the movie, it's grief and guilt.
Director Andrew Davis is a veteran of action thrillers (``Under Siege," ``The Fugitive," ``Collateral Damage"), and he usually thrives with a plot, however ridiculous, that he can speed along. ``The Guardian" is bookended by two technically complex rescue sequences, but the movie sorely lacks momentum. So it's up to the cast to transport us, and that doesn't happen either.
Age has ripened Costner into a wiser figure. But moping, self-pity, and martyrdom don't become him at all. The point of all this solemnity may be to pay serious respect to those rescue swimmers, who courageously look after errant kayakers or victims of Hurricane Katrina.
But what we get in exchange is a movie that feels too much like a Coast Guard recruitment film. Who wants to pay to see that?


         Many products today carry labels that read something along the lines of "100% recycled materials; post-consumer content varies." If the Motion Picture Assn. of America required such a disclaimer, "The Guardian," an action-drama pairing Kevin Costner and Ashton Kutcher, would certainly merit one.
 
  That's a shame, because within the formulaic template and sundry clichés borrowed from such films as "An Officer and a Gentleman," "Top Gun" and countless others celebrating the rigors of military training, there's the germ of a terrific movie that pays tribute to the unheralded rescue swimmers of the U.S. Coast Guard. While "The Guardian" certainly shines a deservedly adoring light on the USCG, it plays more like a two-hour-plus recruitment film than a truly rousing drama. It's entertaining enough but strictly in a wait-for-cable way.
 


         






    The rescue swimmers are a heroic group of men and women who leap into dangerous situations to pluck imperiled seafarers from harm's way. Dropped from helicopters into the angry waters, the rescuer sometimes faces the unenviable task of playing God. As the movie's tagline asks, "How do you decide who lives or who dies?"
 
  In the universe of "The Guardian," it's the filmmakers who decide which characters will live and which will die, but anyone with even a casual acquaintance of boilerplate moviemaking will know within the first few minutes for whom the bells will toll here. That said, screenwriter Ron L. Brinkerhoff and veteran action director Andrew Davis ("The Fugitive") move along the pastiche relatively quickly, and the four rescue set pieces that bookend the movie are suitably thrilling. The movie is strongest when at sea but is unfortunately landlocked for the better part of its middle. It's also marred by some truly awful flashbacks that torment Costner's character leading up to the film's climactic scenes.
 
  In terms of performances, Costner owns the movie with the type of role (like the one he played in "The Upside of Anger") that gracefully eases his career into middle age. It's a transitional part that combines the vigor and broad shoulders of a leading man with the quiet confidence of a wily character actor.
 
  As Ben Randall, Costner is a veteran rescue swimmer whose legendary prowess has allowed him the privilege of remaining in the field while other men his age are moved to desk jobs. Stationed at Kodiak, Alaska, Randall makes the icy waters of the Bering Sea his office. The actor inhabits Randall with the weary physicality of a pitcher who's lost his fastball but is still able to get hitters out with hard-earned guile. He's well aware, however, that time is catching up with him.
 
  To add insult to aching joints, Randall's wife, Helen (Sela Ward), leaves him when she tires of waiting for him to give up his job. A deadly accident involving his crew then lands him in the hospital, and he's temporarily assigned against his will to be the lead instructor at "A" School, the Coast Guard's elite training program in Louisiana.
 
  The situation is reminiscent of that of Crash Davis, Costner's philosopher-catcher in "Bull Durham." Instead of refining diamond-in-the-rough pitcher Nuke LaLoosh for the big leagues, Randall is faced with preparing recruits for the life-and-death responsibilities of being a rescue swimmer. His project is Jake Fischer, a talented but cocky swim champion, played by Kutcher. The grizzled veteran mentoring the headstrong rookie and passing along the torch of wisdom is a well-worn Hollywood tradition and mirrors the attempt to gain Kutcher action-hero gravitas by teaming him with Costner.
 
  In making the leap from television and romantic comedies, Kutcher, for the most part, acquits himself surprisingly well as Fischer. Buffed out to an athlete's build, he's believable as a championship-caliber swimmer and has an easygoing chemistry with Costner. He's less convincing late in the movie when he's called upon to be a leader and never really seems like a guy others would follow into the breach.
 
  The actor is also saddled with an obligatory romance that simply serves as a way to get him out of the training pool once in a while. That story line could easily have been jettisoned (and with it eliminated at least one of the film endings) to allow more time to develop Fischer's comrades.
 
  The overly familiar plot points also make the film feel a little dated, and it would not seem out of place among movies from Costner's late '80s, early '90s heyday when he was the rising star often paired with older actors such as Gene Hackman, Sean Connery and James Earl Jones. There's even a song by Bryan Adams over the end credits to give it a truly retro tone.
 
  Recycling is generally a good thing, but in the movies a little goes a long way.
 

 
 'The Guardian'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for intense sequences of action/peril, brief strong language and some sensuality
 
  A Buena Vista Pictures Distribution release. Director Andrew Davis. Producers Beau Flynn, Tripp Vinson. Screenplay by Ron L. Brinkerhoff. Director of photography Stephen St. John. Editors Dennis Virkler, Thomas J. Nordberg. Visual effects supervisor William Mesa. Running time: 2 hour, 19 minutes.
 
  In general release.   

The brave women and men who serve as United States Coast Guard Rescue Swimmers perform courageous, lifesaving feats every day. Clocking in at a Waterworld ly 139 minutes, The Guardian  catalogs every one of them. Or so it feels in this post-Katrina, here's-to-the-heroes project, directed by Andrew Davis (The Fugitive ) and shot in Shreveport, La. The movie represents an earnest effort to compensate for all the love the media has shown to firefighters and other land-based first responders in recent years with little thought to the Coast Guard; the drama also crashes on wave upon wave of clichés.
We see daring, happily successful rescues. We see daring, unhappily unsuccessful rescues. We observe raw recruits as they mature into team players. We meet grieving Ben (Kevin Costner), a handsome, weather-beaten pro reluctantly reassigned to a teaching post following an in-the-water tragedy, and we watch him bond with cute, brash novice Jake (Ashton Kutcher  like wife Demi Moore, an excellent shedder of tears), who's got his own emotional scars to reveal when he's ready.
Two hours and 20 minutes is plenty of time to reflect on an ocean's worth of tragedies. Also to enact a bar brawl, a bar pickup, a funeral, a graduation, countless training exercises, and many flashbacks to Ben's job-related trauma. (Davis is most confident staging tense water scenes, and least so with the requisite boy-girl interludes.) As for Costner, he shambled into a great career zone last year with The Upside of Anger , and he's now positioned for a fulfilling future specializing in adult males familiar with the compromises of middle age. There's something endearing about the rugged leading man's constant pull toward square sagas, but really: gills? Again?

 Correction Appended  Compared with the other branches of the United States military, the Coast Guard has been underrepresented in American movies, no doubt because its missions and its motto — “That others may live” — do not involve combat, which is after all the staple of military cinema. “The Guardian,” made in cooperation with and in celebration of the Coast Guard, seems to have been produced with the intention of making up the deficit all at once.  Weighing in at over two hours soaking wet, it sometimes feels like five pictures in one and therefore piles up multiple endings. “The Guardian,” emphatically directed by Andrew Davis from a script by Ron L. Brinkerhoff, is an action movie, a basic training movie, a swaggering sea adventure, a home front melodrama and an inspiring tough-love heroic teacher fable. If the aggregate of all these movies is exhausting and occasionally overwrought, some of the parts are stirring and effective, though not exactly fresh.  You might have thought that, after the debacle of “Waterworld” more than a decade ago, Kevin Costner would be loath to leave dry land. But like his character, Ben Randall, a Coast Guard rescue swimmer, Mr. Costner just can’t stay out of the drink.  At the beginning of “The Guardian” Ben is stationed in Kodiak, Alaska, where his job is to leap from a helicopter to swim after unlucky souls who have been swept into the cold, churning waters of the Bering Sea. Ben’s love for his work has strained his marriage, and he arrives home from a live-saving mission to find his wife, Helen (Sela Ward), packing up to leave. “I need to work on rescuing myself,” she says.  There are some more groaners where that one came from, but also some effective, pumped-up action sequences, with computer-generated waves and howling winds, most of them early and late in the film. Sandwiched between the big start and the big finishes is a paradigmatic Kevin Costner movie, in which he plays the crusty, world-weary but unshakably decent mentor to a hot-headed tyro, in this case Ashton Kutcher.  Bruised by on-the-job trauma and the breakup of his marriage, Ben descends to the lower 48, where he becomes an instructor in the brutal training program for rescue divers, known as “A School.”    Mr. Kutcher plays Jake Fischer, a former high school swimming champion with aviator shades and a self-satisfied smirk. Jake’s first encounters with his teacher are a bit uncomfortable, but deep down the two men seem to know as well as the audience that each will learn some valuable lessons from the other. Jake will learn the value of sacrifice and teamwork — saving lives is not about personal glory — and Ben will learn not to give up on himself.  Or something like that. Mr. Costner is comfortable in this kind of role, perhaps too comfortable. The profane, leathery, sad-sack qualities of the character — his unorthodox teaching methods, his fondness for whiskey, his gruff manner — amount to a nearly transparent veneer smeared over his essential saintliness.  At one point, after a night of bonding and truth-telling, Jake apologizes to Ben for various failings. “Don’t you have anything you want to say to me?” Jake asks, expecting an apology in return. But the older man just stares at him blankly. It’s a funny moment, but also a revealing one, since there is nothing in “The Guardian” that suggests anything like real fallibility. In the movie’s fifth and final ending, Ben’s selfless goodness is pushed to the very edge of earthly heroism, as he becomes an almost theological figure.  Meanwhile, though, there is mentoring to be done, in a manner that suggests a serviceable variation on the “Top Gun”/“Officer and a Gentleman” model, most of it taking place in a swimming pool. Mr. Kutcher has a sly star quality, and some of the supporting actors — notably Neal McDonough as Ben’s fellow teacher and sort-of-rival, and Melissa Sagemiller as the schoolteacher who serves as Jake’s love interest — bring a sparkle of wit and invention to their stock characters. The participation of actual members of the Coast Guard lends an air of authenticity, and the mission of “The Guardian” is, in its way, as admirable as their own. It’s not a great movie, but it’s certainly one of the finest Coast Guard pictures you’re likely to see anytime soon.  “The Guardian” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some intense action sequences, salty language and implied sex.

Cliches and conventions from several generations of basic-training scenarios are proficiently recycled in "The Guardian," a shrewdly updated version of classic (and not-so-classic) military-themed pics about grizzled, blunt-spoken vets who transform cocksure hotheads into coolly efficient professionals. With Kevin Costner well cast as a demanding mentor haunted by past failures, and Ashton Kutcher surprisingly effective as a brash recruit dealing with his own demons, the overlong but involving drama has obvious cross-generational appeal. Add some exciting rescue-at-sea sequences, and you have the potential for an early fall breakout hit. 
Neatly sidestepping any possibility for political controversy, this particular basic-training pic pays tribute to saviors, not soldiers. Scripter Ron L. Brinkerhoff focuses on the U.S. Coast Guard Rescue Swimmers, an elite unit of men and women who hoist or dive from helicopters -- often during dangerously stormy weather -- to aid victims in distress. (Production was green-lit well before Rescue Swimmers attracted attention while saving people stranded on rooftops, or drifting in floodwaters, in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.) So arduous is the training that, more than 50% of the Rescue Swimmer candidates drop out before completing their schooling.
Ben Randall (Costner) is a living legend among Coast Guard Rescue Swimmers. But he's hard-pressed to deal with the physical and psychological damage after he loses his entire crew in a fiery crash in the Bering Sea near Kodiak, Alaska. (It doesn't help much that, shortly before the disaster, Randall's neglected wife, played by Sela Ward, left him.)
Randall's commander reassigns him from active duty to the head teaching post at the Coast Guard's "A" School for Rescue Divers. (Bulk of the pic was shot in northwest Louisiana, including locales at Barksdale Air Force Base.) Randall objects, but follows orders.
Enter Jake Fischer (Kutcher), a former high school swimming champ who's certain he has the right stuff to make the grade. On the first day of training, however, he runs afoul of Randall, who's unimpressed by Fischer's bluster, and skeptical of his dedication.
As Fischer divides his time between romancing a sexy schoolteacher (Melissa Sagemiller) during off-duty hours, and trying to prove his prowess to a cynically incredulous Randall, "The Guardian" is more than a little reminiscent of "An Officer and a Gentleman." The big difference here is, the romantic elements are scarcely more than window dressing. Director Andrew Davis focuses primarily, if not exclusively, on the edgy conflict between stern mentor and callow student.
Costner is effortlessly convincing as a savvy and seasoned professional who's not quite ready to pass the torch on to a new generation. Kutcher is every bit as convincing, if markedly less interesting, during early scenes that emphasize Fischer's golden-boy bravado. As complexities of the character are revealed, however, Kutcher's performance deepens and darkens into something far more substantial. Like Fischer, the young actor gradually proves himself as a worthy partner for his older cohort.
Supporting roles are capably filled by the likes of Neal McDonough (as a zealous assistant instructor), Clancy Brown (Randall's severe but sympathetic commander) and John Heard (the "A" School chief). Singer Bonnie Bramlett steals scenes from Costner, Kutcher and everyone else onscreen as a brassy jazz-blues chanteuse who operates a music club near the chool. Sagemiller and Ward have little to do.
Pic clocks in at an indulgent 139 minutes, though it never feels draggy. The training-school story is bracketed with genuinely thrilling rescue sequences convincingly filmed in a 750,000-gallon water tank constructed for the production in Shreveport, La. (Unlike the real-life Rescue Divers, the filmmakers had to flee New Orleans -- their original choice of location -- after Hurricane Katrina struck last year.)
Pic's stab at acquiring a mythical dimension during the final rescue mission aren't exactly successful. But the mission itself generates maximum suspense while showcasing outstanding contributions by production designer Maher Ahmad and f/x supervisor William Mesa. Music by Trevor Rabin recalls his similar scores (complete with martial drumbeats) for "Armageddon" and "Con Air."

The U.S. Coast Guard  rescue-swimmers at the center of The Guardian  may be able to save you from a raging current or a hurricane swell, but even they can't help succumbing to the movie's torrent of watery clichés: an over-the-hill vet (Kevin Costner ) haunted by a deadly mishap, his cocky but immature protégé (Ashton Kutcher ), the inevitable clash between old school and new. And that's just the first 20 minutes! Directed by Andrew Davis  ( The Fugitive ), the movie is scaled as an epic, but plays like a 1940s pro-military quickie decked out with more padding than a Berber carpet. And while Davis remains an adept handler of action scenes, his evident fatigue with the material is the sort of thing that can make a movie sink faster than muscle in the pool. There are momentary pleasures here, chiefly Costner, who's aged very nicely into playing former golden boys. But at nearly two and a half hours, The Guardian  is neither serious enough to take seriously nor flashy enough to get by on thrills alone. Jerry Bruckheimer , where art thou?
