
I'll keep this short. "Happily N'Ever After" is the latest computer-animated stepchild of "Shrek," a pallidly "hip" revision of classic fairy tales that would be better told straight up if anyone had the nerve. It will divert small children, but so will a brightly colored object if you twirl it.
Like last year's "Hoodwinked" -- which looks like "Citizen Kane" next to this -- "Happily" is set in the land of make-believe on a bad day. The wizard who oversees the happy-ending machinery (voiced by George Carlin, not given nearly enough to do) goes on vacation, leaving in charge his sorcerer's apprentices, dutiful Munk (Wallace Shawn) and mischievous Mambo (Andy Dick).
They gum up the works and suddenly all the fairy tales are ending miserably, which is fine for the Wicked Stepmother (Sigourney Weaver), who has always lusted for power. Against her are the tomboyish Cinderella (Sarah Michelle Gellar) and the handsome castle servant Rick (Freddie Prinze Jr.), supplying the necessary heroism in place of idiot Prince Humperdink (Patrick Warburton).
"Happily N'Ever After" is a co-production between the L A -based Vanguard Films and the German animation company Berlin Animated Films, and it is one ugly sucker. The film aims for sassy but lands in soggy, the victim of lazy scripting and pacing. One comes away remembering only Weaver's oddly sexy Wicked Stepmother, which probably wasn't the intended effect.
A throwback to the weird international B-movies that played Saturday matinees when some of us were kids, "Happily" is only appearing in theaters on its way to DVD, where adults will be able to safely ignore it. That should suit the mother sitting a few seats over from me, who slept through the movie while her children rioted with the fidgets.



         Putting a spin on classic fairy tales is nothing new, and unfortunately that's just what the "Shrek"-lite animated feature "Happily N'Ever After" brings to the big screen.
 
  That "Happily N'Ever After" resembles "Shrek" at all is no accident, given that they share the same producer, John H. Williams. This time around, however, first-time feature film director Paul Bolger and screenwriter Rob Moreland have created human protagonists in the form of Cinderella, a.k.a. Ella (voiced by Sarah Michelle Gellar), and Rick (voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr.), the royal dishwasher and her would-be beau.
 


         






    As the film's title implies, things are not as they should be in fairy tale land as Ella's power-stepmother (Frieda, voiced by Sigourney Weaver) attempts to seize control of the kingdom and permanently alter the various storybook endings. Standing in her way are Rick, Ella, vapid Prince Humperdink (voiced by Patrick Warburton) and the obligatory comic relief, Mambo and Munk (voiced by Andy Dick and Wallace Shawn, respectively), who look like plasticized versions of Timon and Pumbaa from the "The Lion King."
 
  Even though Prinze and Gellar are real-life spouses, their computer-generated selves never quite click. Gellar's Ella is disappointingly less-than-progressive despite her updated bob cut, and Prinze, as the reluctant hero with a huge chip on his shoulder, is equally hard to warm up to. And though Gellar and Prinze may be young and hip, they lack the star power — or more specifically, the voice power — of an Eddie Murphy, a Mike Myers and even a Cameron Diaz to carry an animated film on their own.
 
  Voice vets Shawn and Warburton do their best to provide some much-needed backup playing secondary characters, as does Weaver, who brings chutzpah to the film in her role as the "Empress of Evil." Design-wise, Weaver's scepter-wielding Frieda with her over-the-top bosom and impossibly high stiletto heels is an imposing sight who comes off as much dominatrix as wicked stepmother.
 
  Also fun is a battle royal involving the seven dwarfs taking on an aerial assault from a cadre of witches riding chopper-like brooms. And though the romance between Ella and Rick never quite gets off the ground, the built-in appeal of Gellar and Prinze still might be enough to court the preteen sect, but not nearly enough to shake the feeling that "Happily N'Ever After" is the last hangover from the animation glut that was 2006.
 
  "Happily N'Ever After." MPAA rating: PG for some mild action and rude humor. Running time: 1 hour, 27 minutes. In general release.   

 Anyone who dismisses the “Shrek” movies as lowbrow junk should see “Happily N’Ever After,” a cartoon feature that apes those films’ visuals,  soundtrack choices  and rude jokes,  while throwing away their sweetness and conviction.  Like Dreamworks’ ogre comedies, “Happily” is a grab-bag parody set in a fantasyland derived from bedtime stories and Disney films. The adopted chambermaid Ella (voiced by Sarah Michelle Gellar, drawn like Winona Ryder) and the poor dishwasher Rick (Freddie Prinze Jr.) battle Ella’s wicked stepmother, Frieda (Sigourney Weaver).  Frieda has seized control of the kingdom’s Department of Fairytale-Land Security, a surveillance tower in which a wizard (George Carlin) and his hapless, runty, nonhuman minions (Andy Dick and Wallace Shawn) monitor the kingdom’s continuing narratives (Rapunzel, Rumpelstiltskin, etc.).  That’s a good setup. Unfortunately, the filmmakers are content to repeat fairy-tale tropes in a smug   directorial voice. Worse, unlike “Shrek”  —  which countered Disney’s 19th-century aesthetic by insisting that morality defines beauty, not the other way around  —  “Happily” regurgitates  retrograde attitudes while pretending to criticize them.  Despite self-aware touches   — including Mr. Prinze’s resentful, smart-aleck narration and   a sight gag in which the film seems to slip free of its sprockets    —  this is another tired kidsploitation product in which a wasp-waisted ingénue and a shallow beau (whose boy-band looks make him a redundant alternative to Patrick Warburton’s predictably vain and oafish prince) drive the plot and live happily ever. The stepsisters are cardboard gold diggers, the stepmother a haughty shrew who’s not fit to wield the wizard’s magic staff.  Potentially lively backup characters   — kindly sous-chefs in toadstool-shape hats; bipedal wolves with “Sopranos” accents; plump butch  witches on jet-propelled brooms  —    get   stuck with the usual options: Serve the pretty ones or get lost.  Root for the stepmom.  “Happily N’Ever After” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for rude jokes and mild innuendo.

Opening the first Friday in January, "Happily N'Ever After" marks a New Year's resolution of sorts, kicking off 2007 with a shift away from talking-animal toons. Yet, this underwhelming entry is a kind of equally overused fairy tale revisionism, this time depicting what might happen to all such tales if Cinderella's wicked stepmother took control. "Happily" even shares a producer with "Shrek" (John H. Williams). Still, this colorful, crowd-pleasing toon is likely to deliver, if Lionsgate can take a page from the Weinstein Co.'s "Hoodwinked" playbook by adding marketing muscle and a wide release to its modest investment.
Premise is something of a sham in that all fairy tale characters -- from poisoned-apple-eating Snow White to solitary-confined Rapunzel -- are miserable for the greater part of their own stories. And though "Happily" threatens to deliver an unhappy ending, it really only offers the same unhappy middle as the stories it sets out to subvert.
Story begins with the resident wizard (George Carlin), whose job it is to make sure Fairy Tale Land's many romances all go "by the book," leaving his two dim-witted assistants in charge while he goes on vacation.
Rather than allowing for a "Sorcerer's Apprentice"-style scenario, in which Munk (Wallace Shawn) and Mambo (Andy Dick) accidentally turn Fairy Tale Land on its head, the wizard's absence serves as the device by which malicious stepmother Frieda (Sigourney Weaver) takes charge. In command of the wizard's staff, Frieda invites all manner of evildoers into the kingdom, tipping the scales toward unhappiness on all the fairy tales in progress.
Greatest effect is Ella (that's short for Cinderella, voiced by Sarah Michelle Gellar) and her dunderheaded Prince Humperdink (Patrick Warburton), who romance is short-circuited before the stroke of midnight.
But other fairytales are going awry, too: One prince falls into a deep slumber after kissing Sleeping Beauty; another yanks Rapunzel out of her tower by the hair.
Screenwriter Rob Moreland is good with the one-liners but weak on plot, which means the movie's moment-to-moment riffs, references and sundry puns satisfy considerably more than its insincere love story ever could. It's a clever idea that Ella should prefer Rick (Freddie Prinze Jr.), the servant boy, to the more conventionally attractive prince, but the romantic tension never really takes hold.
Wearing her hair in a Winona Ryder-style pixie cut, Ella is one thoroughly modern young maiden, and Rick is presumably every 10-year-old girl's fantasy, designed to look like a big-eyed, long-haired Bratz boy doll. One of the pic's many unresolved mysteries is where exactly this guy gets off calling the prince "pretty boy." The animators seem to enjoy watching Rick walk and typically pose him with one hip thrust out in defiant contrapposto.
Meanwhile, the female characters all boast hourglass figures that would make even Jessica Rabbit jealous. There's something unseemly in such over-sexualized character design, matched by an equal lack of imagination in most of the backgrounds. The castle, for example, looks like some kind of giant kitchen appliance, a letdown compared with the breathtaking alternatives presented in the countless Disney films that director Paul J. Bolger so flippantly dismisses.
Luckily, the voice talent elevates the pic above its visual limitations. Casting director Ruth Lambert 
hasn't gone star-crazy the way so many other animated movies do (though Pixar generally trusts character actors, most toons court A-list names with little or no sound-booth experience). "Happily" taps strong voices such as Weaver and Gellar for key parts, but otherwise relies on animation regulars to elevate the repartee. Warburton, Dick and Shawn are all old pros.
Polished sound design enhances the experience, making the giant's footsteps and witches' brooms vibrate all four walls when they pass, while Vanguard Animation (responsible for lo-fi carrier pigeon flop "Valiant") injects plenty of color wherever it can't afford to animate detail.

With shtick as dull as it is ill-natured, this tasteless inversion of the Cinderella story features the voice of Sigourney Weaver  as a generically shrieky wicked stepmother who discovers she can tinker with fairy-tale endings, notably that of Cinders (Sarah Michelle Gellar ), who sports a short black Audrey Hepburn  'do and a mistaken crush on a narcissistic prince (Patrick Warburton ) brazenly ripped off from Beauty and the Beast 's Gaston. Remember those fabulously giddy bits in Shrek   that riffed on just about every fairy-tale character known to Western man? Well, here director Paul J. Bolger  and screenwriter Rob Moreland  have drained the affectionate wit out of the Shrek  franchise's satire, giving us instead a barely sketched out story line and quantities of unimaginative CGI. I spent the movie scratching my head over which audience Lionsgate is hoping to tap with this noisy rubbish. YouTubers? Tots with A.D.D.?
