There may be a story hidden amid the attractive bits and pieces that make up the film "Happy Here and Now," but goodness knows, I can't find it. Set in New Orleans, this collection of loosely connected set pieces was written and directed by Michael Almereyda, who is perhaps best known for his 2000 iteration of "Hamlet," an inspired reconsideration of the classic text in which the moody Dane poses his famous question while strolling the aisles of a video store. That scene suggests Mr. Almereyda has a conflicted relationship with mainstream narrative; in both "Hamlet" and films like "Nadja," that conflict greatly works to the director's dreamy advantage. Alas, here it does not. Shot several years ago in the pre-ravaged Crescent City, the film takes place in what is meant to look like tomorrow but, because of the lag time between production and distribution, looks an awful lot like last year. In a page torn from the William Gibson playbook, characters in the film communicate with one another using some kind of Internet hookup, electrodes stuck to their heads and avatars that allow them to assume other identities. These avatars permit  a buggy exterminator like Eddie (David Arquette) to assume a rather more seductive form when he cruises the Internet, dropping pickup lines on babes like Muriel (Shalom Harlow), the woman who gives the film a smidgen of mystery by disappearing. The title "Happy Here and Now" may be ironic; perhaps not. Certainly no one in the film seems especially happy to be in the here and the now except a little girl named Josephine (Josephine Martin), who strums an electric guitar under the casual care of her mother (and Muriel's aunt), Lois (Ally Sheedy). Shortly after Muriel disappears without trace or explanation, her sister Amelia (the Canadian actress Liane Balaban) shows up at Lois's house and begins a lackadaisical search that mostly entails moping around picturesque locales that bring her face to face with various picturesque locals, including a bluesman by the name of Ernie K-Doe, Lois's friend Bill (Clarence Williams III) and a handful of squatters only slightly more believable than the Hollywood habitués in "Rent." In time, we also meet the most engaging member of this self-conscious menagerie, Eddie's firefighter brother, Tom (the Irish actor Karl Geary). Nothing much happens with this character, however, who like a seeing-impaired widow, Hannah (Gloria Reuben), disappears in a fog of intellectual allusions, goofy sight gags and  body-and-soul stirring rhythm and blues. Like some other contemporary films that try to stitch together a small army of characters into a community of sorts, "Happy Here and Now" feels like a symptom in search of a cure. The utopian impulse that seems to drive these films is hard to knock, but it can be less than persuasive when the characters seem little more than avatars for the people behind the camera, as they are here (and now). There is one other character worth mentioning in "Happy Here and Now": Eddie Mars. Devotees of Turner Classic Movies will recognize  the name of the gambler Humphrey Bogart goes up against in "The Big Sleep." In the Howard Hawks film of the Raymond Chandler novel, Eddie Mars tells Philip Marlowe, "Your story didn't sound quite right." With screwball timing, Marlowe says, "Oh, that's too bad - you got a better one?" Eddie Mars shoots back, "Maybe I can find one." In between the tough-guy patter, Chandler writes that it doesn't matter where we lie: we all sleep the big sleep. What matters, as we know from both the book and the film, are the stories we tell. The lyrically minded Mr. Almereyda clearly knows this; it's just that here his story doesn't sound quite right, either. "Happy Here and Now" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). There is some swearing, but nothing you haven't heard before. 

Following writer-director Michael Almereyda's remarkable "Hamlet" two years ago, "Happy Here and Now" is an affirmation of something Almereyda has been slowly building toward -- a cinematic malleability that allows a single film to seem at once brazenly experimental in content and form, yet deeply indebted to narrative and plot. And it is (as was "Hamlet") an uncanny pulse-taking of our technology-saturated times, where identity has become not just a salable commodity but a mass-marketed one. This singular, raggedly beautiful film, which also manages to fit concerns about detective noir, Blaise Pascal's "Pensees" and the blues music of the late Ernie K. Doe into its svelte 89-minute form, isn't for everyone. It seems certain to confound as many viewers as it will inspire. But pic will foster a core critical contingent that will find itself transfixed and, ultimately, deeply moved by the film's ravishing power, and which will in turn generate a highly interested, if limited, specialty audience.
Pic begins with the director's best use yet of his beloved Pixelvision photography, with the slightly blurred, black-and-white aesthetic creating the world of a virtual-reality Internet chatroom, wherein the users can project whatever image of themselves they desire via a series of electrodes attached to their bodies.
The time is the near future, and the conversation taking place, between a young man (Karl Geary) and woman (Shalom Harlow), is about identity and the way in which the online world might serve as a portal into alternate realities. In fact, this very conversation may not be happening at all, or at least not happening between the two people whose faces are projected on the screen.
The woman, whose name is Muriel, has disappeared, and her sister, Amelia (Liane Balaban), has gone to New Orleans to find her. Helping Amelia is an over-the-hill private eye (Clarence Williams III). Their only clues are the few fragments that remain on her sister's wiped-clean hard drive of mysterious chat sessions with a space cowboy who calls himself Eddie Mars.
Almereyda's primary concern here is identity (or, more specifically, the notion of self), but this isn't about the evils of the Internet. Rather, Almereyda takes a look at the fundamentally human predicament happening at the dawn of the 21st century, when so much about the universe and its infinite mysteries has been revealed and, yet, people are so deeply unsatisfied. There is a sense that happiness is always fleeting, now and then, here and everywhere.
Film also deals with the isolation of our everyday lives so that we might disappear online, get swallowed up by that great information superhighway, and no one would know. (The film is at its most sardonic when it entertains the notion that Muriel may indeed have vanished into her computer.)
But, there's a glimmer of hope in the film. "Happy Here and Now" concerns a disappearance, yes, but it is also a film about reappearance, re-emergence, rebirth.
As Amelia retraces her sister's footsteps, "Happy Here and Now" divides into two distinct halves. There are the Pixelvision chat sessions and the color, 35mm segments (set in the "real world") that concern, among other things, a solemn firefighter named Tom, recovering from the accidental death of a co-worker. Though Tom is played by the same actor -- Almereyda veteran Karl Geary -- who appears as Eddie in the Pixelvision sequences, the "real" Eddie is actually Tom's brother (played by David Arquette in his best-ever performance), who merely projects himself as Tom when he chats with Muriel and Amelia. (Likewise, there is a scene in which the detective projects himself as Amelia, unbeknownst to Eddie.)
The final third of "Happy Here and Now" begins with an exhilarating convergence. Eddie sets out to make a film for the Internet, while Amelia and the detective close in on Eddie, certain that he has information about Muriel. There is then a scene in which Amelia falls asleep at the computer, virtual-reality electrodes still attached, and a dream ensues -- a Pixelvision and Super 8 dream in which Amelia is the costumed heroine of a Feuillade-like adventure, that is perhaps the most sumptuous scene Almereyda has ever shot.
It is the companion to the "Mousetrap" sequence in "Hamlet" -- a dizzyingly personal movie-within-a-movie that reimagines, in gloriously abstract terms, the events we have just witnessed. For "Happy Here and Now" is, above all, a film about different ways of seeing, from its one-eye-blind firefighter's widow (Gloria Reuben) to the literal and figurative visionaries who populate Eddie Mars' mythical monologues.
Almereyda has a marvelously alien way of staging action; we seem to be floating above everything, in a trance. This isn't the tidiest of pictures -- Almereyda lets certain characters and story threads dangle. (Ally Sheedy in particular has almost nothing to do as Muriel and Amelia's spacey aunt.) But mostly there's a piquancy to that fragmentation.
There are remarkable performances here, particularly by Geary in a challenging dual role. One of the film's most distinctive effects is its ability to convince viewers that when they see Geary online they are actually seeing Arquette. Pic is well shot, in lustrous saturated colors, by Jonathan Herron, and soundtrack boasts a near-embarrassment of diverse musical riches.
Camera (DuArt color), Jonathan Herron; editor, Kristina Boden; music, David Julyan; music supervisor, Tracy McKnight; production designer, Leonard Spears; art director, Dan Adams; costume designers, Luca Mosca, Marco Cantoretti; sound, Antonio Arroyo; supervising sound editor, Todd Milner; associate producer, David Arquette; assistant director, James Roque; casting, Lina Todd. Reviewed at CineVegas Film Festival (Jackpot Premieres), June 8, 2002. Running time: 89 MIN.
 


Strange by even its director's ultra-eccentric standards, Happy Here and Now  takes Michael Almereyda 's usual reality-blurring, video-mediated experimentation to new what-the-fuck levels, which is a good thing for the most part. Bubble-voiced Amelia (Liane Balaban ) arrives in pre-Katrina New Orleans to investigate the disappearance of her sister Muriel (Shalom Harlow ), who might have fallen victim to a creepy, philosophy-spouting Internet chat buddy. Little sleuthing actually gets done as Amelia circulates aimlessly among a group of bayou eccentrics, including a multimedia porn artist (David Arquette ), a one-eyed widow (Gloria Reuben ), a firefighter with existential issues (Almereyda regular Karl Geary ), and a randomly appearing aunt (Ally Sheedy ). With the aid of a retired detective (Clarence Williams III ), Amelia searches for her sibling via an online role-playing program that could be a through-the-looking-glass portal.
If Almereyda intended Happy  as his 9-11 allegory, the movie has become unavoidably attached to the Crescent City 's recent tragedy and probably owes its belated theatrical release to national interest in anything New Orleans–related. In any case, Happy  approaches life's big questions in a playfully abstract manner that recalls I  Huckabees avant la lettre —e.g., Geary's emotionally conflicted fireman, abundant references to European thinkers (Blaise Pascal  and Nikola Tesla , in this case), and a climactic emergency that mind-melds the entire ensemble cast. Almereyda's Internet and video digressions seem awfully scattershot at first, and his free-associative editing style takes forever to find a rhythm. But when Amelia takes the full multimedia plunge in the movie's final moments, Happy  becomes something inexplicably (and metaphysically) beautiful. Souls transmigrate, identities recombine, and conflicts solve themselves, though the central mystery surrounding Amelia's sister remains ambiguous. "If there was a point, there wouldn't be a story," says Arquette's slimy director. Almereyda adheres to the phrase's screwy logic with grace, humor, and the confidence that even the most anarchic madness can yield an elegant method.
