When the eye of the married man wanders in Yvan Attal's breezy, skin-deep sex comedy, "Happily Ever After," the object of desire could be any of the thousands of shapely dream girls teeming through the streets and bars of Paris. And as the movie's opening scene suggests, many of those women can be even more forthright about acting on their desires than the beady-eyed hound dogs  who harangue them with the same  old lines. That's how Vincent (Mr. Attal), a mildly rakish car dealer with a wife and young son, embarks on an affair with an unidentified masseuse (Angie David), a cool ash-blond beauty and epitome of Parisian delectability. With barely a word exchanged, she snatches him up in a bar after rejecting the bumbling come-on spewed by the man standing next to him. Minutes later, she and Vincent are clawing off each other's clothes in the elevator speeding to her apartment. For a man who has created a nearly perfect life for himself, what harm could there be if he discreetly indulges in a little something on the side? That's the sort of thinking that landed Sherman McCoy, the  protagonist of "The Bonfire of the Vanities," in  trouble. But Paris is not New York. And if Vincent's exploits don't upend the City of Light, they are not without consequences. The movie's message may be terribly familiar, but it still bears repeating. Sexual combustibility is powerful stuff, and to extend a quick  encounter into a supposedly casual affair is to infuse fantasy with reality; the more ecstasy, the more attachment, the more attachment, the more expectation. Vincent and his beautiful, devoted wife, Gabrielle (Charlotte Gainsbourg), a real estate agent, have reached the point in their marriage when the passion has cooled to a simmer that requires novelty for the heat to be turned up. When they unleash their pent-up frustrations in a domestic food fight, that fire momentarily flares. But you can't keep a marriage spicy by emptying the entire contents of the refrigerator over each other's heads every day. Vincent finally succumbs to temptation after having absorbed one too many tales of conquest by his smarmy co-worker Fred (Alain Cohen). A smug, preening bachelor so ordinary looking he wouldn't turn a head, Fred is an unlikely Don Juan who succeeds on sheer nerve. In front of his friends, he schedules multiple liaisons on a constantly jingling cellphone. He  chastises Vincent and his ilk for living on the fairy tales they learned as boys. Vincent and Fred belong to a triumvirate of soccer-and-poker-playing pals of whom the third, Georges (Alain Chabat), is an unconvincing modern update of the henpecked husband. For him and his blond, pregnant wife, Nathalie (Emmanuelle Seigner), a sexy but abrasive 70's-style feminist, marriage is a blood sport fought over such sexually loaded issues as her giving their son a girl's toy or his impulsive purchase of a flashy sports car. As they go at each other tooth and nail, these two are more like Punch and Judy than Edward Albee's George and Martha. A fourth, entirely cardboard pair, briefly seen, are an Indian couple who seem to have it all after 20 years: hot sex and perfect devotion. Nobody does adultery in movies with more style and zest than the French, especially when the mode is frivolous. And anyone who watches "Happily Ever After" can identify with the grass-is-always-greener daydreams that haunt its characters. By introducing three different couples, the director and screenwriter tries halfheartedly to turn "Happily Ever After" into a treatise on marriage, but Vincent and Gabrielle's story is the only one that matters. Gabrielle is so in tune with Vincent that she instantly senses his infidelity but decides not to confront him, despite the pain. The film's more contemplative scenes observe her own responses to the temptations thrown in her path. One possibility involves a handsome stranger (Johnny Depp) standing beside her at a record store listening booth. The two don't speak or touch, but one move in the charged atmosphere might change everything.

A meditation on the joys and pitfalls of coupledom that aims for a good relationship with auds but will have some viewers clamoring for divorce, "...And They Lived Happily Ever After" follows three male buddies and the women in their lives. Scripter-helmer-thesp Yvan Attal's narrative and cinematic choices clicked commercially with "My Wife's an Actress" (2001) and will probably do so again, but mix of banal and contrived story elements is simultaneously trite and overblown.
Inveterate ladies' man Fred (Alain Cohen) sells cars alongside Vincent (Attal) who is married to realtor Gabrielle (his real life companion since 1991, Charlotte Gainsbourg). They have a son, as does their pal Georges (Alain Chabat), a hotel manager whose strident wife Nathalie (Emmanuelle Seigner) is obsessed with making cracks about sexual equality.
Only Gabrielle -- whose daydream-style flights of fancy constitute pic's few almost-original touches -- has both an inner and outer life. She senses that Vincent has a mistress (Angie David) but chooses not to let on that she knows.
Pic's problem is that the three males as presented have nothing special to offer except that they work for a living and aren't disfigured. There's very little wit, charm or even energy on display.
Vincent's idea of showing his family affection consists of dousing them with water or ketchup. Georges and Nathalie are always at each other's throats. Fred picks up women the way a dark sofa attracts lint. Gabrielle is more appealing but still far from riveting.
Thesps (Gainsbourg excepted) rarely transcend the schematic material to seem like anything other than characters in a movie who have been positioned to explore two worthy themes: Is marital infidelity destructive or no big deal? Is it terminally bourgeois to be faithful and raise kids?
Repetitive and needlessly prolonged tale does build to an inspired final scene, but it's too little, too late.
Faux-spontaneous widescreen camerawork is tiresome. Mostly English-language songs are used as sometimes apt, sometimes clumsy punctuation. Claude Berri and Anouk Aimee are well cast as Vincent's parents and Johnny Depp is a classy guest star.
For the record, non-pro Cohen played the little boy in producer Claude Berri's 1968 "The Two of Us."
Camera (color, widescreen), Remy Chevrin; editor, Jennifer Auge; production designer, Katia Wiszkop; costume designer, Jacqueline Bouchard; sound (Dolby), Didier Sain, Jean-Paul Hurier, Jean Goudier, Marc Doisne; associate producer, Nathalie Rheims; assistant directors, Olivier Horlait, Antoine Gameau; casting, Laurent Soulet. Reviewed at Pathe screening room, Paris, Aug. 23, 2004. (In Toronto Film Festival -- Contemporary World Cinema.) Running time: 105 MIN.
 


IN SATMAR CUSTODY    Written and directed by Nitzan Gilady   April 6 through 12, Two Boots Pioneer
These days, on the sidewalks of leafy enclaves in upstate New York , bearded men sporting black hats and long, curling side locks pass women with covered heads pushing old-fashioned prams. The scene, straight from some shtetl described by Isaac Bashevis Singer , conceals a contemporary tragedy of ancient Greek proportions in director Nitzan Gilady's chilling and thoroughly engrossing documentary In Satmar Custody .
Gilady, a secular Israeli of Yemeni origin, disguised himself as a Hasidic Jew to film a fervently anti-Zionist, ultra-orthodox Satmar sect, who recruit new members among Yemen 's impoverished Jewish community. A young Yemeni couple, Yahia and Lauza Jaradi, heeds the call, with disastrous results. Stranded upstate, fed gefilte fish, taught only Yiddish and Torah, the Yemenis find themselves culturally adrift. One day, an accident lands the Jaradis' youngest daughter in the hospital; after allegations of abuse, all five of their children are removed and placed with Satmar families.
Gilady builds the tension as in a noir thriller, with haunting music, lots of night scenes, and men in dark coats shot from low angles and car windows. Yahia wanders about, seeking clues to his life's unraveling, as the community's crude manipulations become increasingly clear. Lauza, the bereft mother, remains a mystery worthy of Dostoyevsky or Flaubert. Gilady's film would like to absolve her (and to a large extent it does), but it leaves behind a perhaps more disturbing question: What is left of a person whose points of reference have all been taken away?

HAPPILY EVER AFTER    Written and directed by Yvan Attal    Kino, opens April 8, Paris Theatre
If there is any doubt as to whether French cinema is in a state of free fall, Yvan Attal's Happily Ever After  should put such uncertainties to rest. This would-be comedy about a thirtysomething family man (Attal) and his foray into infidelity is probably the worst in the putrid bushel of recent Gallic imports. Whiny and petulant, Attal's bourgeois schmuck sure has a lot to complain about: a svelte wife (real-life spouse Charlotte Gainsbourg ) who graciously tolerates his kvetching, an exceedingly well-behaved tot, and a job as a luxury-car salesman that apparently permits ample time off. Adultery tempts both husband and wife—he acts on it, she doesn't—and the resulting rounds of shrill soul-searching quickly crescendo to an earsplitting cacophony. As an actor, Attal is comically tone-deaf, flailing about like an attention-starved baby. As a director, he's a hack for whom subtlety is anathema. (A third-act reconciliation cues "Can't Help Falling in Love.") Always a fascinating screen presence, Gainsbourg has more to do than in Attal's previous solipsism-fest My Wife Is An Actress , but she's again stuck playing the marble goddess opposite her hubby's schlub. The more Attal insists on his inferiority, the greater his narcissism grows. Happily Ever After  is almost worth sitting through for cameos by Anouk Aimée  and Johnny Depp —two consummate actors whose near wordless scenes are like oases of calm amid the self-important chatter.
