
That verb in the title is no typo.
In fact, "Harvard Beats Yale 29-29" comes from the most famous headline in the history of Harvard's undergraduate newspaper the Crimson. That headline refers to what remains the most famous football game in Ivy League history. It occurred 40 years ago this Sunday, when Harvard made such a jaw-dropping comeback - scoring 16 points in the final 42 seconds against a much superior Yale team - that it seemed like victory every way but numerically.
No matter how storied or exciting, a football game is still just a football game. Kevin Rafferty, the director of "Harvard Beats Yale 29-29," opening today at the Brattle, recognizes that what gives the game its enduring interest - and what, in turn, makes his documentary so engaging - is the way it ramifies in other contexts.
Rafferty's approach could hardly be simpler. He goes back and forth between footage of the original television broadcast as called by the late Don Gillis to current-day talking-head interviews with players on both sides.
They are, almost without exception, excellent commentators: articulate, reflective, at once proud of their involvement in the game and not unaware of its relative insignificance in any larger scheme of things. Also, they are all white. (Yale's star running back Calvin Hill, an African-American, isn't interviewed.) This underscores how the game's greater import, as the players point out, has to do with its time-capsule aspect.
It was the '60s, after all. Harvard fullback Pat Conway had served as a Marine in Vietnam. The Harvard offensive line had a guy in SDS blocking alongside a guy in ROTC. (Another member of that line was Tommy Lee Jones, who's among the interviewees.) And Yale was still all-male. Brian Dowling, Yale's quarterback, was such a larger-than-life figure he inspired a Yale Daily News cartoonist named Garry Trudeau to come up with a football-playing character named B.D. So you might say, in a sense, the game gets replayed every day on the comics page.
The larger point "Harvard Beats Yale" makes, perhaps, is about the inevitability of loss. Many of these men, now in their early 60s, look terrific. Others, let us say, do not. Either way, all of them look very different from the helmeted young athletes of 40 years ago. A sense of mortality shadows the documentary. On or off the gridiron, time is the only opponent who always wins. Even at Harvard, even at Yale.

 For most of the world, I suspect, the year 1968 signifies upheaval, revolution, power to the people, Vietnam and My Lai, Paris in flames, Martin and Bobby, Nixon versus Humphrey. Another great rivalry played out that year in the form of a college football game. And while it seems absurd to include such a picayune event in the annals, the filmmaker Kevin Rafferty makes the case for remembrance and for the art of the story in his preposterously entertaining documentary “Harvard Beats Yale 29-29,” preposterous at least for those of us who routinely shun that pagan sacrament.  True gridiron believers doubtless know every unlikely, heart-skipping minute of this showdown. (The schools, like some others, honor their football rivalry with vainglorious capitalization, calling each matchup The Game.) On Nov. 23, 1968, the undefeated Yale team and its two glittering stars — the quarterback Brian Dowling and the running back Calvin Hill — went helmet to helmet against its longtime rival, Harvard, also undefeated.  Mr. Dowling, a legendary figure whom grown men still call god (and the inspiration for Garry Trudeau’s Doonesbury character B. D.), had not lost a game he started since the sixth grade, a record that well into the fourth quarter, with Yale leading by 16 points, seemed safe.  Everything changed in the final 42 seconds as all the forces of the universe, or so it seemed, shifted and one player after another either rose to the occasion or stumbled with agonizing frailty. Gods became men as the ball was lost and found and one improbable pass after another was completed. In front of the increasingly raucous packed stadium, each play became an epic battle in miniature with every second stretching into an eternity. As in film, time in football doesn’t tick, it races and oozes, a fact that Mr. Rafferty, working as his own editor and using the simplest visual material — talking-head interviews and game footage — exploits for a narrative that pulses with the artful, exciting beats of a thriller.  What’s most surprising about this consistently surprising movie is how forcefully those beats resonate, even though you know how the story ends from the start. (Take another look at the coyly, cleverly enigmatic title, borrowed from the famous headline in The Harvard Crimson.) One reason for the excitement is the game, of course, which remains a nail-biter despite the visual quality of the footage, which is so unadorned and so humble — and almost entirely in long shot — it looks like a dispatch from a foreign land. And in some ways it was: Football fans still wore raccoon coats to games and the women in the stands cheering for Yale could not attend the college. The same month,  Yale announced it was (finally) opening that door.  This history helps explain why there are no women here, at least in close-up. “Harvard Beats Yale 29-29” is very much about men, triumphant, regretful, defiant, sentimental, touchingly vulnerable men who are made all the more poignant with each image of them as young players. For some, the game was and remains the greatest moment of their lives — even better than sex, one volunteers, prompting Mr. Rafferty to ask off-camera if the man had then been a virgin (no). Mr. Rafferty, himself a  Harvard man, films his subjects (Tommy Lee Jones, a Harvard lineman, included) with a lack of fuss in plain kitchens and cluttered offices. He lets them roam around their memories and, for a time, gives them back sweet youth.

How many thrillers could put the outcome in the title and still provide as many white-knuckle moments as "Harvard Beats Yale 29-29"? Although common wisdom says docs can't draw a crowd, producer-director-editor-d.p. Kevin Rafferty's film is so much fun it could prove an exception, especially given the word of mouth that will surely follow widespread festival play. 
Rafferty's unadorned sports saga is built around the broadcast of the Nov. 23, 1968, match-up and Don Gillis' play-by-play, which provide the thrills in a game in which Yale led 29-13 with 42 seconds to play.
But the heart comes from interviews with the players, who revisit an extraordinary football game, played at a time when the country was a political powderkeg: The two Ivy League squads, both of which entered the contest undefeated, included members of both the paramilitary ROTC and the antiwar SDS, and at least one battle-scarred Vietnam vet. 
But politics were forgotten at kickoff time, the players remember. War protestors and Wall Street alums put their differences aside on Saturday afternoons to rah-rah-rah. 
The Harvard Crimson were the underdogs, despite their record, Yale having been powered all season by prodigious quarterback Brian Dowling, who hadn't been on the losing side of a football game since seventh grade. (It was Dowling who served as the model for the character B.D. in "Doonesbury," drawn by Yale classmate Garry Trudeau.) Yale also had Calvin Hill, who would later play for Dallas in the NFL. 
The former players are almost uniformly witty, charming, funny and reflective; Rafferty shoots them straightforwardly, without much comment, although when he does ask a question, the answer is usually hilarious. The ex-players include Tommy Lee Jones, who was on the team, too (if not a pivotal part of the game), and the actor is generally so humorless that this becomes funny in and of itself. 
While "Harvard Beats Yale 29-29" would seem an unusual choice for the politically minded Rafferty ("Feed," "The Atomic Cafe"), the game does serve as something of a metaphor for both coexistence and tenacity, given its time and place. One implied lesson arises from how the men have lived with the results over the last 40 years -- "It was just a football game," one says, almost blasphemously, but putting the whole of collegiate sports in perspective.
Camera (color, HD), Rafferty; sound, Rafferty. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Real to Reel), Sept. 7, 2008. Running time: 105 MIN. 

 


Pundits agree: The 2008 election has finally and forever rung down the curtain on America's longest-running psychodrama, namely the Boomerography, a/k/a the Sixties. The long, strange trip is finally over. Still, a few stories remain to be told or retold: This week brings an evocative and affecting pair of interview-driven, time-traveling documentaries that, back during the Clinton administration, might have been grist for Oliver Stone 's mill.
Harvard Beats Yale 29-29  marks a particular 40th anniversary—not Richard Nixon 's election, but the scarcely less astonishing event that occurred a few weeks later in Cambridge, Massachusetts , when the undefeated Harvard  football team met undefeated Yale  and, trailing by 16 points with 42 seconds left in the game, scored twice to confound its arch rival with a tie. Filmmaker Kevin Rafferty, then a Harvard undergrad, was an eyewitness—along with his father, a former Bulldog—to this famous edition of The Game, as the annual Harvard-Yale matchup is dubbed. Taking its title from the Crimson 's next-morning headline, his account is enjoyably steeped in ambience and ambivalence.
Mysteries of the Ivy League  revealed: New York Times   sportswriter Robert Lipsyte  characterized The Game as "an upper middle-class picnic," signifying "Eastern snobbishness or poor football [or] unreachable 'class'." As interviewed by Rafferty , however, the Crimson are definitely more salt of the earth—or at least less preppy—than the Bulldogs. One guy survived Khe Sanh; another, admitting to long-ago Progressive Labor Party  tendencies, maintains that the Crimson essentially coached themselves—"In the spirit of '68, we took over the team." At Yale, where Young Americans for Freedom had more clout than Students for a Democratic Society , football forestalled protest, particularly as the team featured campus godlings like Brian Dowling , a quarterback who hadn't lost a game since junior high school, and the highest scorer in Yale history, future NFL Hall of Fame halfback Calvin Hill .
Yale's supermen were subject to a certain amount of joshing from their classmate Garry Trudeau , who incorporated Dowling and others into his undergraduate version of Doonesbury , and some remain sensitive. Dowling, in particular, still seems incredulous that Yale failed to win the '68 Game, while Hill, perhaps sick of talking about it, could not be cajoled to appear. Rafferty does, however, deliver a few bona fide stars. Harvard lineman Tommy Lee Jones  is on hand to intone the requisite '60s clichés with exquisite sanctimony—acting!—and a very young Meryl Streep  makes an unexpected cameo, albeit in a photograph. (Then a Vassar  undergraduate, she was dating one of the few political activists on the Yale team.)
Footnotes to the Boomerography: Jones is prodded to comment on his erstwhile roommate Al Gore . He grudgingly reveals that the future vice president and Nobel laureate figured out how to play Dixie on a touch-tone phone, thus providing Rafferty with end-credit music, as well as priceless color commentary. Meanwhile, Bulldog cheerleader George W. Bush  is evoked by a former roommate, with reference to the previous year's drunken escapade ripping down the goalposts at Princeton  (a major scene in W. ).
The talking heads mainly are intercut with The Game—an excellent way to watch it, especially as the first half consists of Yale crushing the vaunted Harvard defense. The halftime score is 22-0. The Crimson change quarterback and their luck; still, the Bulldogs enter the fourth quarter up by 16. With the Yale band taunting their rivals with The Mickey Mouse Club   theme and Yale fans rudely chanting "You're number two," Rafferty settles into The Game's astounding finale, albeit annotated by players' total recall of old grudges and expression of fresh regrets. Yale draws a few penalties, calls a bizarre time-out, and fails to adjust for an onside kick, but it's a disputed instance of pass interference that cues the movie's Zapruder moment and the sense that a "weird force" had taken control. (Perhaps that's why the suspense remains fresh.)
The last 42 seconds are an eternity. Yale was the perceived loser, although the most philosophical interviewee believes that everybody won—The Game of Games insured their immortality. This may or may not be the greatest instance of college football ever played, but Brian's Song , Jerry Maguire  , and The Longest Yard  notwithstanding, Rafferty's no-frills annotated replay is the best football movie I've ever seen: A particular day in history becomes a moment out of time.
