
In disseminating a message that condemns prejudice and advocates tolerance, "Hate Crime" is an apt follow-up to the two Matthew Shepard-themed movies that aired on TV in 2002. But what is not entirely clear is what "Hate Crime" adds to the equation that hasn't been done before. Still, boasting admirably high production values and a couple of marquee names, item could well turn up on cable.
Story centers on gay couple Robbie (Seth Peterson) and Trey (Brian J. Smith) and their Bible-thumping next-door neighbor Chris (Chad Donella), the son of a fundamentalist Christian pastor (Bruce Davison) and his wife (Susan Blakely). When Trey is fatally injured in a gay-bashing incident, Robbie suspects Chris, but the detective on the case (Giancarlo Esposito) blames Robbie. Only when Robbie does his own detective work does he discover the truth is more complicated than anyone thought. For the most part, "Hate Crime's" dialogue is tired and uninspired, seemingly ripped from a dozen MOW's. But one well-edited sequence intercutting two sermons deserves praise. As one minister preaches abomination, the other acceptance, both beg the question: Who, or what, is God?
Camera (color), Ian W. Ellis; editor, Darrin Navarro; music, Ebony Tay; production designer, Stanford Gilbert; costume designer, Sabina Winningham. Reviewed on DVD at Palm Springs Film Festival, Jan. 16, 2005. Running time: 105 MIN.
 


In a Dallas suburb, a homophobic preacher's son (Chad Donella) moves next door to a handsome gay couple (Seth Peterson  and Brian J. Smith ). Given this setup and the rather unsubtle title—both redolent of made-for-TV dramas and the gay film fest circuit—you would think you know what happens next. But first-time director Tommy Stovall  stirs in enough plot twists (some more plausible than others) to keep you guessing—as well as seething with frustration. When Hate Crime  confounds expectations, it transcends the whodunit-of-the-week template. On the other hand, when the plot gets lost in irrational revenge fantasies, you'll wish you had stayed home watching reruns. Bonus points for luxury casting: Bruce Davison  as the cartoonish Bible-thumping dad, creepily reminiscent of his X-Men  role, and Giancarlo Esposito  as a detective whose prejudice threatens to veer the investigation off course, along with the rest of the film.
