Head butting is more like it, in Fatih Akin's punkish Head-On  — bad attitudes and a battle of wills between a couple of suicidal Turkish Germans who can't decide whether to fall in love or bleed to death. Permanently scowling Cahit (Birol Ünel), who lives a yowling, beer-guzzling bum's life in Hamburg, drives a car into a wall in a bid for death; pretty Sibel (Sibel Kekilli) is ready to slit her wrists — again — if Cahit, whom she meets in a psychiatric clinic, won't wed her, at least in name, to free her from the choking control of her conservative Muslim family. So he does.
Can this marriage be saved? Akin's showily grimy Berlin Film Festival prizewinner is propelled by ferocious sex, nasty violence, and coy interludes of traditional Turkish love songs warbled by a folk band on the banks of the Bosporus; it's also propped up by scenes of Turkish-German conflict that tell much less about cultural collision than about what arbitrarily self-destructive crazies these two are. When the  unheroic hero of the great 2001 film Late Marriage  fights family and tradition, for instance, the balance of cultural and dramatic truth is exquisite. But when Cahit rubs his hands in broken glass or Sibel is raped, uprooted ethnicity is only a cover of exoticism.

ove doesn't just hurt in the jagged German romance "Head-On"; it cuts and bleeds and even kills. A story about a lonely man and a still-lonelier woman fighting against their worlds and what often seems like their own best interests, the film has caused a stir in Germany for the murky, troubling light it sheds on the lives of the country's Turkish immigrants. Its popularity made it a fleeting social phenomenon and a minor cultural footnote. But it doesn't explain why this film about two strangers with suicidal tendencies and a deep commitment to self-aggrandizing drama is the first very good movie of this very young year. One of the truisms about romances, even those shaded pitch black and set to banging rock music, is that you have to fall in love with the characters when they're falling for each other. It takes a long time for Cahit (Birol Unel) and Sibel (Sibel Kekilli) to get inside each other's heads, much less anywhere else. The couple meet in a nasty, classically punk fashion at a mental institution, where they have both landed after trying to commit suicide. Cahit drove a car into a brick wall; Sibel slit her wrists, and probably not for the first time. He is dying for a drink and likely dying from drink. Meanwhile, what Sibel needs more than anything else, more than a nip or a prescription for Zoloft, is a Turkish husband. The only daughter in a strict German-Turkish family, Sibel has a broken nose and scarred arms, and is living a life of everyday brutality. The character was born in 1980's Hamburg, but for Fatih Akin, who both wrote and directed "Head-On," she might as well be living in another century or any cloistered society where women are kept captive by their fathers and brothers and called whores for wearing short skirts. Sibel's father happens to be a conservative Muslim. Yet for Mr. Akin, the son of Turkish guest workers who immigrated to Germany and ended up in Hamburg, where he was born, religion is not specifically, or at least exclusively, the problem. The problem is how faith becomes dogma, a prison sentence and worse. For Sibel, the solution to that problem is a husband who can pass muster with her father, which is how she and Cahit end up under the same roof. Movingly played by both Mr. Unel and Ms. Kekilli, the couple enter the arrangement with no illusions, their relationship developing in reverse of the typical romance: they start off steeped in cynicism and doubt, and in separate beds. Cahit, who's on a long downward spiral, betrays little interest in Sibel and the world from which she comes, and it soon becomes clear why. During the couple's wincingly comic courtship, when Cahit is playing nice and sober opposite Sibel's sanctimonious father, her thuggish brother sneers about the suitor's fumbling Turkish, asking what he did with it. Cahit answers coolly, "I threw it away." In time, Mr. Akin reveals why Cahit lets this lost lamb into his fold, though he doesn't really try to explain the character's rationale or go spelunking in the darker recesses of his mind. People are strange and filled with contradictions, and sometimes that's all you need to know. Cahit is as haunted by the past as Sibel is plagued by the present. Both are slaves to loves: he of heartbreak, she of her father and his God. For his troubles, Cahit wears the mantle of tragic hero, a role the charismatic Mr. Unel embraces with exuberant, tangible heat. Sibel, meanwhile, embodies the film's divided conscience. Split between two cultures, yearning for life and for death, the character is struggling to declare not just her independence, but her very being. "Head-On" may offend those who endorse cultural relativism, no matter how noxious its consequences, or forget that freedom from religion is as essential as freedom of religion. Mr. Akin's commitment to his characters is uncompromising, as is his humanity, which makes a mockery of the kind of politically correct pieties that often plague stories about cultural outsiders. Unlike, say, Ken Loach in his last film, the nauseatingly smug "Ae Fond Kiss," Mr. Akin doesn't presume to know how to tie up religious, cultural and sexual differences in a neat package. Germany, it emerges, is no more hospitable to Cahit and Sibel than the couple's own family and background. It also isn't any better for non-Turkish Germans. That's tough on this unlikely pair, but it's not the end of them, either. Despite the tears, the blood and the booze, "Head-On" is a hopeful film, if for no other reason than Cahit and Sibel can't be sized up or pinned down, their troubles filed under immigration and assimilation. Their tribulations are at once specific and universal, by turns grimly funny and darkly ironic. Set principally against the grubby environs of working-class Hamburg, in dives and derelict apartments, the film has a terrific sense of place. The city's grubbiness works a vivid contrast to the visions of Turkey that flicker throughout the film. Istanbul looks beautiful, but then so, too, does Cahit's wreck of an apartment, where anarchy and the freedom it promises linger as stubbornly as the smell of stale beer and cigarettes.

A marriage of convenience in Hamburg between two troubled Turks changes both their lives in the fine, gritty, contempo love story "Head-On." More immediate and passionate than helmer Fatih Akin's previous pic, "Solino," this ambitious, confident fourth feature, which won the Berlin fest's Golden Bear, will ride a high-profile festival career into upbeat biz in major arthouse markets and later hold its head high in ancillary.
Following an obviously long-standing path of self-destructive behavior, 40-year-old Cahit (Birol Unel) concludes a night of drinking and fighting by driving his old car head-on into the wall of a building. At the psychiatric clinic, a well-meaning doctor (Hermann Lause) quotes cult band the The to his incredulous patient: "If you can't change the world, change your world."
Soon thereafter, he's approached by a patient, Sibel (Sibel Kekilli), who asks him to marry her. A charming, effervescent would-be free spirit, Sibel yearns to break free from the suffocating control of her devout parents (Aysel Iscan, Demir Gokgol) and wild-eyed, overprotective brother (Cem Akin). So desperate she's tried to slash her wrists, her offer of marriage includes living separate lives.
Initially reluctant, Cahit allows himself to be cleaned up and, under the tutelage of pal Seref (Guven Kirac), manages to persuade her suspicious family that he's legit.
After their traditional marriage, she takes to freedom like a duck to water. In addition to drinking and drugging with Cahit, Sibel gets her navel pierced and drags him to clubs, where he usually passes out and she leaves with a different man each time. Cahit is comfortable with the arrangement for a few months, content to have a clean flat for once and enjoying rough sex with on-again, off-again lover Maren (Catrin Striebeck), who hires Sibel at her hair salon.
Drawing strength from Sibel's love of life, Cahit begins to tumble for her. In a jealous fit of rage he dispatches one of the men with whom she had a one-night stand after he returns to mock the cuckold. With Cahit headed for prison, Sibel realizes she loves him, too, and during her subsequent stay in Istanbul without him, she spirals down into personal degradation.
Later, a newly focused Cahit travels to Istanbul for a climactic meeting with the now-settled Sibel.
To a story that sounds conventional and convoluted on the page, Akin brings work that equals his previous best. Pic possesses the nervous lowlife energy of "Short Sharp Shock," the leisurely yet logical plotting and careful attention to character detail of "Solino" and just enough of the quirky, life-affirming humor of "In July" to keep the proceedings from bogging down in the grief these two cause each other on their way to mutual respect and love.
Akin also clearly relishes the chance to dive deeper into Turkish culture and explore the slippery slope of identity and cultural pride faced by Turks who either move to or are born in Germany. The dreary, multicultural, working-class district of Hamburg-Altona is a far cry from the sunny beauty of Istanbul, where Cahit is startled to discover his Turkish cabbie actually hails from Bavaria.
Unel, who has been in all Akin's features save "Solino," brings an appealing ferocity to Cahit. Newcomer Kekilli, discovered by Akin after an exhaustive search for what his producers called "young women who speak Turkish fluently and are ready to get undressed in front of the camera," has a lithe beauty and a natural relationship with the lens. Frequent collaborator and co-producer Mehmet Kurtulus plays a bartender who exploits Sibel during her debasement in Istanbul. Other perfs are fine.
Tech credits are top-of-the-line in all departments. Musical interludes serve to underscore the tragedy as they relieve the intensity; longtime Akin crony Idil Uner interprets numerous tunes by Romany musician Selim Sesler, accompanied against an Istanbul backdrop by a six-piece band.

Hoisting the flag of Europe's new hybrid cinema, Fatih Akin 's Head-On  took the Golden Bear at last year's Berlin Film Festival , went on to sweep the German equivalent of the Academy Awards , and won the 2004 European Film Award. It's hardly the first movie to explore the terra incognita of Turkish Germany—indeed, the 31-year-old Akin, born in Hamburg  to Turkish parents, has made several previous features on the subject. Head-On 's distinction is that, in recounting the tale of star-crossed lovers Cahit and Sibel, it eschews social criticism and inside ethnography for something more romantic and alienated. Call it doner kebab weltschmerz.
Antihero Cahit (Birol Ünel) is a fortysomething janitor who collects the beer bottles and sweeps up the debris in a Hamburg dive before engaging in his own round of drunken barhopping. This morose, grizzled, potentially violent sot lives in a miserable hovel where a Siouxsie (of the Banshees) poster bears mute witness to his punk past—and perhaps the happiness he enjoyed with late German wife. One night Cahit plows his jalopy into a wall and winds up in a clinic, where he meets Sibel (Sibel Kekilli ), another failed suicide half his age. This proud and impulsive rebel girl sees marriage to dissolute Cahit as a "green card" that will allow her to escape her traditional Muslim family and set off on her own life of sexual exploration.
Sibel is clever—spiriting Cahit out of the clinic to a bar—and she's persistent. When the grouchy janitor turns down her proposal, she breaks a bottle and reslashes her wrists. Sibel's will prevails and Cahit, who can barely speak Turkish, has to pass himself off as a respectable suitor and meet her suspicious family. (He agrees to be a beard and, once he shaves, we're treated to his ravaged good looks.) The ethnic antics have a family resemblance to those of the far more focused and poignant Israeli immigration comedy Late Marriage . There's a big fat Turkish wedding—albeit with the bridal couple getting coked up to cope.
Head-On  starts as a bleary smear. A sense of jangling discord underscores Cahit's punk youth, but the film is framed as a ballad. The action is punctuated by a six-piece Turkish Gypsy ensemble playing to the camera on the picturesque banks of the Bosporus. And the doings turn increasingly melodramatic and ultimately violent once Sibel enters Cahit's miserable life. Installed in his crash pad, she gets a piercing and a job in a salon run by a tough broad who is Cahit's sometime lover. Evenings, Cahit takes Sibel dancing; radiantly happy and always on the make, she picks up guys and goes home with them, leaving Cahit to retrash the apartment. (A 24-year-old amateur discovered in a Cologne  shopping mall, Kekilli throws herself into her performance, exhibiting the same adventurous abandon with which her character embraces her new life.)
Dour as Cahit is, how could he not be captivated by this lithe, unflappable honey? As the clincher, Akin contrives a homemade biber dolmasi dinner that's nearly as hot as the cook. And how could their arrangement do anything other than cause chaos and misery? Head-On  loses its merry mojo once events turn irrevocable and the action switches from Hamburg to Istanbul . Germany may be toxic but Turkey  is . . . what? The return to a homeland that Cahit and Sibel neither know nor understand is crucial to the movie's meaning—and, a cynic might think, to its success with European audiences.
Once in Turkey, Akin sets up a symmetrical tragedy and then, perhaps too attached to his characters, continues on for another half-hour. Head-On 's ending isn't exactly a happy one but the late-inning narrative shift does allow additional time to consider who these people might be. In an odd spin on the immigration story, rootless Cahit and Sibel are ultimately too complex for the fiction that holds them.
