         Chris Terrio's "Heights," opens on a stage where a couple of skinny, slouchy Julliard students perform a scene from "Macbeth" as though they were modeling for a Calvin Klein ad. By the time the girl pulls out a revolver, their teacher, Diana Lee (Glenn Close), has seen enough. "This isn't the Sopranos," she says. "Get a dagger."
 
  Nobody ever does, though, which is the main problem with "Heights," a nicely executed, if slight, contempo-Woody Allen parable about actors who don't act and photographers who don't see. Based on a play by Amy Fox, "Heights" is beautifully shot on location in New York and consistently well-acted, but it sticks a little too closely to the surface to be very compelling. The story unfolds over a single day, divided into loose chapters separated by title cards, which organize the characters into intersecting pairs. It's the kind of movie that's easier to admire than to actually like.
 


         






    Diana is an Oscar-winning grande dame of the New York theater scene whose upturned face is plastered on bus stops all over town. Even as she's bemoaning the absence of passion in the modern age, telling her students, "We're not even people of ice. We're tap water," Close keeps Diana on a tight, sardonic leash. Her exhortations are pure artistic bombast, designed to thrill her students, who hang on her every word as though one of them will turn out to be their lucky ticket to fame.
 
  "What would I do if I found out my husband were sleeping with someone else?" she asks, setting up a big, supermarket pyramid-pile of expectations for the movie to topple as it progresses. "Nothing. I'd cry into my soy latte." Then, "For God's sake take some risks this weekend!"
 
  Of course, Diana's husband is 
sleeping with someone else — her understudy, whom Diana appropriately dubs "Eve Harrington." Diane and her husband have an arrangement, and Diana has no intention of making a scene. But as the day progresses she becomes more disturbed by the idea that her husband has fallen in love with the other woman. That morning, Diana tries lamely to bribe a young actor, Alec (Jesse Bradford), into being her date with the promise of some power-networking opportunities at her birthday party, which she's throwing for herself that evening, Mrs. Dalloway style. The actor is reticent because he's connected to Diana in an illicit way. Later, she turns her passive-aggressive attention to daughter Isabel.
 
  If Diana is an actress in her own life, then Isabel (Elizabeth Banks), a photographer who longs to document the lives of "real people" (by which she means the picturesquely poor, unattractive and otherwise unfortunate), is blind to her own. Weeks shy of her wedding to Jonathan (James Marsden), a lawyer with the face and body of an underwear model with whom she seems to enjoy a companionable if somewhat passionless relationship, Isabel finds herself beset with obstacles to her nuptials.
 
  Isabel's ex-boyfriend Mark (Matt Davis) suddenly appears, dangling a dream-job shooting in Eastern Europe for the New York Times, which would conflict with her wedding. Later, she and Jonathan visit a bumbling rabbi (George Segal) for premarital counseling, and he tries to paint a picture of interfaith marriage as a honeymoon on the Gaza Strip. None of these objections have anything to do with Jonathan's well-kept secret, which threatens to surface in a very public, very disruptive way.
 
  Genteel to a fault, "Heights" sticks to the shallows of New York haute-bohemian life, staying as clear as possible of anything resembling passion or loss of control. That's the point, but it's a little too arch to be much fun. Diana never confronts her husband or his lover with anything more than a wistful look and a wry smile. Isabel ignores all manner of warnings. Nobody weeps into his or her nutritionally sound caffeine drink. The only guy to inflict a puncture wound is an incidental mugger.
 
  Instead, the characters' chiseled cheekbones cut through the city's august institutions and bastions of glamour like shark fins through still water. Close is a bright spot, but she's kept at too far a distance from her character's life to delve into it with the relish she surely could have mustered. Finding a distraught Isabel in a stairwell, late at night, Close's Diana resorts to poetry; which, really, is nobody's idea of a maternal consolation. In "Heights," things might get bad, but they never get ugly.
 
 'Heights'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, brief sexuality and nudity
 
 Times guidelines:
 Mild sexual content
 
 A Sony Pictures Classics release. Director Chris Terrio. Producer Ismail Merchant and Richard Hawley. Screenplay by Amy Fox. Based on the original stage play "Heights" by Amy Fox. Additional screenplay material; by Chris Terrio. Director of photography Jim Denault. Editor Sloane Klevin.  Running time: 1 hour, 33 minutes. In limited release.   

 Jean-Paul Sartre famously wrote that "hell is other people." It is not a well-known fact that the people he was specifically referring to are the men and women in the film "Heights." Directed by the newcomer Chris Terrio, who wrote the film with Amy Fox, basing the screenplay on Ms. Fox's one-act play of the same title, this programmatic fiction tracks five New York characters who, over the course of 24 hours, search for direction, a sense of purpose, a life. Like the film, the characters mean well and look good. But they're so deeply immersed in their own heads that they can't see the world for their needs.  Front and center is Isabel (Elizabeth Banks), the delicately pretty, emotionally thwarted daughter of a famous actress of stage and screen, Diana (Glenn Close). Isabel is engaged to the even prettier Jonathan (James Marsden), behind whose cagey, darting eyes lies a groaningly obvious secret. Shortly after the story opens, Jonathan is dodging calls from Peter (John Light), a journalist writing a profile about a fine-arts photographer whose provocative male nudes are probably meant to evoke the sensational work of Robert Mapplethorpe but look closer to the glossy fashion snaps of Herb Ritts. Hovering nearby is Alec (Jesse Bradford), a hungry young actor who lives upstairs from Isabel and Jonathan, and just that day will audition before his idol, Diana.  In its aspirations, design and worldview, "Heights" resembles a number of other films about cozily connected souls. These films, like "Love Actually," constitute a soap-operatic subgenre that might be called We Are the World. Sincere to a fault, they are built on the bedrock of decency or, more accurately, a set of shared assumptions. In these films, married characters occasionally stray, but no one ever smacks the kid, kicks the dog or burns with true, blood-boiling hate. (Todd Solondz makes We Are the World movies, too, but no one hates as passionately in his movies as he does.) Everybody hurts, as Michael Stipe likes to sing, but people in "Heights" seem to hurt more or at least spend a lot of time nursing that hurt in brooding silence and noisy confrontation.  In the film's geometry of longing, women yearn for men who yearn for someone else. A daughter tentatively reaches out to a mother cocooned in narcissism; a mother boldly reaches out to a would-be lover who, as his cellphone murmurs suggest, will never return the compliment. Meanwhile, as the characters and their desire crisscross, an iconic image of Diana as a Lady Macbeth stares from  every bus and phone booth, the way Carrie Bradshaw's image haunted "Sex and the City." It's unclear what the film's director, Mr. Terrio, wants to convey with this image of Shakespeare's bloody queen, but good parenting is doubtless not part of the equation. Boring progeny, alas, are.  And so, while mommie dearest smiles her murderous smile on the Midtown bus, Isabel drifts through her day, transfixed by ennui or maybe just psychotropic drugs. Ms. Banks is a nice-looking blonde, with an angled face that recalls Parker Posey's, but here she seems too frail a vessel to carry the weight of all this cumbersome drama.  She and the film perk up when, during one of her mother's soirees, she meets a roguish Welsh artist who simultaneously hits on her and calls her out for being a New York cliché, thereby allowing the film to have its cake and eat it,  too. All's well that ends well, ad nauseam. Still, there is something unaccountably entertaining about the moment when, during that same soiree, Diana purrs to a startled man, "Do you merengue?"  "Heights" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has nudity and the usual adult language.
There's always the danger of forgetting that the rich and gorgeous have problems from which their furniture can't entirely save them. Merchant Ivory 's regular reminders work best as period films, where we can ogle those antiques like venal history scholars. Heights , unfortunately, happens now. This expansion of Amy Fox 's stage roundelay tracks Manhattan theater types, whose lives intertwine in ways that constant, pounding piano arpeggios let us know are very significant. Glenn Close  is Diana Lee , a drama doyenne assaying Lady Macbeth while her husband boffs Lady Macduff. Her photographer daughter, Isabel (Elizabeth Banks ), is soon to be married to Jewish lawyer Jonathan (the badly Ruffaloed James Marsden ), who has a secret past and, oops, present too. Cracking faults in these relationships occasion overwrought suspense: slow ascents of dark stairs, heavy silences, and surplus brow furrowing.
As a journalist whose muckraking about his art world boyfriend stirs up old ghosts, John Light  is frozen in a lugubrious scowl. Rufus Wainwright , as his bitchy interviewee, finds the camp escape hatch. As a Fringe Festival actor caught up in the couples' tricky business, Jesse Bradford  takes the respectable real-person route. But in this study of keeping up appearances while everything falls apart, the stakes never seem as high as the title suggests. At one point, Isabel tells an old flame that her fancy wedding will prevent her from accepting a dream Times Magazine  assignment. "There are," she laments, " string quartets !" And as Close, spouting an appreciably eccentric amount of situation-appropriate Shakespeare , recedes from the spotlight, we miss her greatly. One reviewer wrote, "This is the film I wanted Closer  to be." That's funny, this is a film I wanted to be Closer . Or, at least Close-er.
