
For more than 25 years, Canadian filmmaker David Cronenberg has been making movies about man's fatal attraction to the extreme -- be it electronic ("Videodrome"), scientific ("The Fly"), medical ("Dead Ringers"), transgender ("M. Butterfly"), narcotic ("Naked Lunch"), erotic ("Crash"), virtual ("eXistenZ"), or psychological ("Spider"). His latest movie, "A History of Violence," is something of a change-up. A mild-mannered, small-town fellow is accused of having gone to grisly extremes in the past.
The film has the perverse intelligence of Cronenberg's other movies. It's not his best, but it is certainly his most accessible, least stagy work, obeying the laws of chronology and serving up characters whom we recognize as people. The movie's brilliance resides in its use of cinematic convention to shatter an illusion of social normalcy.
The Stalls, whose home is perched on a handsome plot of land in Millbrook, Ind., are an average Middle-American clan, untroubled and happy. The adults, Tom (Viggo Mortensen) and Edie (Maria Bello), are still wildly attracted to each other, and the teenage son, Jack (Ashton Holmes), gets along great with Mom and Dad despite his pot smoking and woes at school.
The family's placid state is broken after two men show up at the diner Tom owns, just as it's about to close for the night. They try to rob the place, but in a nimbly choreographed sequence, Tom turns from his neighborly self into an efficient defenseman, killing his assailants and becoming a celebrity in the process.
But the heroic glow brings out the strangest things in the Stalls. Jack, for one, doesn't merely stand up to the school bully the day after his father's incident, he bludgeons him. The sweet kid turns into a rebellious teen who would put a scare into any punk on the WB.
Soon an unwanted visitor, played with hammy malice by Ed Harris dressed in a black suit, slithers out of the woodwork and into the diner. He insinuates that our hero is actually someone named Joey. Tom is baffled. Edie is outraged. And "A History of Violence" starts looking like a noirish action movie reframed within the contours of a Western.
This is a hard film to be more detailed about because Cronenberg has so richly booby-trapped his question of whether Tom is or was a killing machine. Needless to say, Harris's character and his impossible accusation spark a note of disharmony in the Stall household that had probably been roiling just beneath the surface all along.
"A History of Violence" has been adapted by Josh Olson from a graphic novel by John Wagner and Vince Locke, and Cronenberg seems to have attempted to duplicate the deliberate, flat dimensions of a comic book. The early first scenes of the picture often seem like a gravely serious cartoon, which, ironically, frees the movie to be funny, though without ever feeling frivolous. In fact, the film's equilibrium is poised on a line between comedy and peril, a precarious balance best demonstrated in the contrast of two sex scenes between Tom and Edie.
One happens before Harris shows up: Edie puts on a cheerleader's costume and pretends to be in her girlhood bedroom with her parents just down the hall. The other happens after. Both are funny, but the second one is charged with the animal danger that the initial tryst used as an erotic fantasy.
Not all the subversions hang together. The film feels disjointed, particularly toward the end, but afterward it blooms in the memory. The tone deepens as the story develops, in much the same way that the exuberant cheapness in the first half of David Lynch's "Mulholland Drive" turns out to be an elaborate hoax. Cronenberg is not toying with us as Lynch was; instead, he's challenging us.
People showing up for a Viggo Mortensen action vehicle will be bummed at how commercially abnormal "A History of Violence" is. It's an essay about human nature and the struggle against it. The film is also intensely curious about what movie violence means for the characters provoked to engage in it. Yet Cronenberg likes movies too much for this one to be an anti-entertainment deconstruction of them.
The bone crushing and shootouts supply the visceral kick they're supposed to. The sex is hot. The menace is palpable. And the performances of Mortensen, Bello, and Holmes are excellent. In other words, "A History of Violence" is a real-life movie with disturbing dramatic implications. The impossibly happy family that sat around the breakfast table at the start of the picture is drastically altered come the supper at the end.


         "A History of Violence" is a ticking time bomb of a movie, a gripping, incendiary, casually subversive piece of work that marries pulp watchability with larger concerns without skipping a beat. It's a tightly controlled film about an out-of-control situation: the predilection for violence in America and how that affects both individuals and the culture as a whole.
 
  It's the gift of "Violence," which stars Viggo Mortensen and Maria Bello and features terrific support from Ed Harris and William Hurt, that it manages to do all these things without seeming to make a fuss. That's how strong and compelling its dead-on plot is, and how much command of the medium veteran Canadian director David Cronenberg demonstrates.
 


         






    With more than a dozen features to his credit over three decades as a director, Cronenberg is a filmmaker whose previous work, from "Scanners" to "Naked Lunch," "Dead Ringers" and "The Fly," has usually played out on reality's farthest shores. But not this time.
 
  Working from a script by Josh Olson adapted from John Wagner and Vince Locke's graphic novel, Cronenberg reprises the naturalistic style he used in 1983's underappreciated "The Dead Zone." His protagonists are Tom and Edie Stall (Mortensen and Bello), believably happily married and "living the American dream," as one character puts it, with their two children in bucolic Millbrook, Ind. "I'm the luckiest son of a bitch alive," Tom says early on, with Edie replying feelingly, "You are the best man I know. No luck involved."
 
  "I enjoyed that aspect of the film, it was like a free gift," the director explained when "Violence" debuted at Cannes. "When you're inventing weird stuff, you have to start from scratch so the audience gets it. The dynamics of family are so understood you can start from a higher level and go further. You get the gift of emotional intensity, people relate and are drawn in in a way a bizarre fantasy never could accomplish."
 
  Though Cronenberg didn't say so, having normally excessive directors attach themselves to nominally conventional stories has other benefits. Even when they're on their best behavior, filmmakers like Cronenberg can't help but add their own provocative, off-kilter tone to the material. And because these sensibilities are filtered through a deceptively straightforward story, the effect is disturbing in ways that more fantastical tales, easily dismissible as unrealistic, rarely are.
 
  It's a measure of Cronenberg's confidence in his material, his cast and his own skill that he purposely opens this ultimately compelling film with a glacially paced sequence of a pair of drifters checking out of a motel at a velocity that only Jim Jarmusch in full "Broken Flowers" mode could love.
 
  It's apparent almost at once that these are not the best of men, and with the introduction of Stall, owner-operator of Millbrook's popular luncheonette, we know in the pit of ourstomachs that a collision is inevitable.
 
  Beyond that early confrontation, however, all bets are off as "Violence" changes narrative direction and focus frequently without ever losing sight of the ideas behind its breakneck plot.
 
  For what this film is concerned with more than anything is the pernicious, corrosive effects of violence, the way its pervasive taint is as hard to rub off as blood is to wash out. Each act of mayhem in the film, however seemingly justified, simply begets yet another one, until it starts to seem axiomatic that once you let violence into your life it will never leave you alone, never allow anything to be the same. The question is, once you've taken someone's life, can you ever be a whole person again?
 
  Despite its subject matter, "Violence" never loses sight of a resolve not to go overboard à la Quentin Tarantino in its depiction of violence. What we see is strong enough to give the film an R rating, but Cronenberg's veteran cameraman Peter Suschitzky and editor Ronald Sanders never stray from the director's determination to make the violence what he's called, echoing Thomas Hobbes' famous line, "nasty, brutish and short."
 
  What Stall does to get the plot in gear would fit a classic movie definition of heroism, but this nontraditional film is more concerned with not letting us forget that it is also violent, and as such has an effect on all the relationships in Stall's life, including his intimate moments with his wife and how he interacts with his teenage son, Jack, and his younger daughter, Sarah (Ashton Holmes and Heidi Hayes, both making strong feature debuts).
 
  The instant celebrity Stall achieves with his actions in this age of media overkill has an especially unexpected result. Its an indication of how much his life has been changed that it draws to town Carl Fogarty (Harris), an East Coast mobster with a ravaged face and an insinuating manner who inexplicably insists that Stall is someone he knows from the past. Both Harris and a fellow mobster played by Hurt are indelible, savagely theatrical characterizations, brilliant encapsulations of controlled, bitter menace that show sides of both actors that we've never really seen before.
 
  From an acting point of view, however, this film belongs to Mortensen and Bello as a severely challenged husband and wife. Making use of Mortensen's sweetness and vulnerability as well as his "Lord of the Rings" physicality, Tom Stall is one of the best roles Mortensen has had, and he takes full advantage of it. Matching her costar's level of commitment, Bello gives her most involving performance, supplying a level of emotional belief that is the film's secret weapon, holding it together no matter where it goes.
 
  "A History of Violence" finally belongs to the man who held the entire equation of the film in his head and made it add up, David Cronenberg. Yes, the director admitted in Cannes, this effort on one level does not seem as initially challenging as some of the films he's done before. On the other hand, "it has a simplicity, such a transparency that you can see through it into something else that is underneath. And that something else is quite disturbing." Quite disturbing indeed.
 
 'A History of Violence'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for brutal violence, graphic sexuality, nudity, language and some drug use.
 
 Times guidelines:
 Considerable violence and frank sexuality.
 
 Released by New Line Cinema. Director David Cronenberg. Producers Chris Bender, J.C. Spink.  Screenplay Josh Olson, based on the graphic novel by John Wagner and Vince Locke. Editor Ronald Sanders. Cinematographer Peter Suschitzky.  Running time: I hour, 38 minutes.  In general release.   

 A masterpiece of indirection and pure visceral thrills, David Cronenberg's latest mindblower, "A History of Violence," is the feel-good, feel-bad movie of the year. The story of a seemingly average American family almost undone by cataclysmic violence, the film takes place in a surreal and mercilessly brutal land, Anytown, U.S.A., that has been repeatedly soaked in blood only to be repeatedly washed clean. The great kick of the movie - or rather, its great kick in the gut - comes from Mr. Cronenberg's refusal to let us indulge in movie violence without paying a price. The man wants to make us suffer, exquisitely.  Mr. Cronenberg also wants us to have a good time, and it's this tension between cinematic pain and pleasure that helps make "A History of Violence" such a sensational moviegoing experience. The film, which hinges on an upstanding citizen and reluctant mystery man, Tom Stall (brilliantly played by Viggo Mortensen), takes it as an article of faith that we, the multiplex allegiant, have been long-reared on the ways and means, giddyups and brutalizing downs of the action movie. Decades of mainlining blockbusters have, for better or perhaps for worse, inured us to the image of bullet-chewed bodies and the pop-pop-pop of phony weapon fire. For the contemporary movie connoisseur, film death is now as cheap as it is familiar. To which Mr. Cronenberg quietly says, "Oh, yeah?"  Loosely adapted by Josh Olson from the 1997 graphic novel by John Wagner and Vince Locke, the film opens with two men exiting a motel room. The younger man (Greg Bryk) is dressed in a T-shirt and jeans; the older (Stephen McHattie) wears the black suit of a funeral director and a Beelzebub Vandyke. Although it's day, probably morning, each also wears the scowls and sagging expressions of men who have long been hard at work. And back to work they go: the older man heads to the motel office to check out while the younger drives their late-model convertible a few dusty yards. When the older man returns, he sends the younger one to fetch water. They're almost ready to hit the road, but, first, there is killing to do.  There is a lot of killing in "A History of Violence," none more troubling than the first murder, which takes place inside that motel office turned charnel house. In its outrageous brutality, this inauguration into the spectacle  - and entertainment  - of death signals that Mr. Cronenberg's film isn't the usual bloody cinematic joy ride. There is, it soon emerges, nothing usual or routine about "A History of Violence," which at first plays like a stock genre picture (or an outtake from "Pulp Fiction"), only to grow progressively freakier and hair-raisingly nasty. A master of conflicting, contradictory moods, Mr. Cronenberg has a history of turning genre, particularly horror, inside out and upside down, and he applies his cool intelligence and prodigious craft to the action movie like a French deconstructionist moonlighting as John Woo.  The killers ultimately get theirs, as monsters almost always do in Hollywood movies, receiving their villainous comeuppance from a figure of outwardly impeccable rectitude and gentleness: Tom Stall. Happily married with a sexy, adoring wife, Edie (Maria Bello), and two charming children, the teenage Jack (Ashton Holmes) and a towheaded pipsqueak named Sarah (Heidi Hayes), Tom runs a diner straight off the yellowing cover of a  Saturday Evening Post in a town as cozy and sleepy as one perched on an old studio back lot. Here, the townsfolk greet one another with a smile and a wave, and youngsters share ice cream sodas like Mickey and Judy. There isn't a Wal-Mart or McDonald's in sight  - no boarded-up storefronts, no toxic waste dumps, no despair, no bums, no bad men.  Although the sign above the front door of Stall's promises "friendly service," these villains receive something altogether different when they enter the diner early one evening. In a furiously paced scene that tears a hole in both the character and the town's pacific facades, Mr. Cronenberg establishes that he can outgun Mr. Woo and then some with a sensationally choreographed shootout. The encounter leaves both desperados dead  - Mr. Cronenberg lingers on one man's ripped away face for a few squirmingly uncomfortable seconds  -  and Tom is declared an "American hero." The media descends in short order as do three men (including Ed Harris) whose sunglasses, black town car and tough-guy accents suggest we're not in Kansas (or Hollywood) anymore, but somewhere north of David Lynch's "Mulholland Drive" and far west of Lars von Trier's "Dogville."  Like both those films, "A History of Violence" explores the myth and meaning of America (or at least a representative facsimile) through its dreams, nightmares and compulsive frenzies. But where Mr. Lynch invariably imbues the violence in his films with eroticism, mixing in lipstick with the blood, and Mr. von Trier has recently let didacticism get the better of his ideas, Mr. Cronenberg plays it cool. He knows that movie violence turns us on: we kiss to the bang-bang. There's something undeniably exciting about Tom's heroic actions, so much so that they effectively produce a veritable contact high, first spurring his son to stand up to a bully and, a while later, inspiring some intensely rough sex that will leave his wife covered in abrasions. But there is something irredeemable and soul-killing here, too.  "A History of Violence" might have easily been called "A History of America," but it would sell both Mr. Cronenberg's art and his purpose short to reduce this film to an ideology. While transparently set in small-town America (Ontario passing for Indiana), the sheer unreality of the hamlet initially makes it clear that this story is not taking place in the here and the now, but in a copy of the world that looks  - wouldn't you know it  - a lot like a movie. Mr. Cronenberg, a Canadian,  is taking aim at this country, to be sure. But he is also taking aim at our violence-addicted cinema, those seductive, self-heroicizing self-justifications we sell to the world. Perversely, though, the more violent this film becomes  - in time, the blood flows all the way to Philadelphia  - the more real Tom and his family seem. He kills, therefore they are.  That sounds far grimmer or at least more relentlessly grim than this shrewd, agile, often bitingly funny film plays. Ornamented with ghoulish comedy (a "live bait" sign posted at a murder site) and superbly acted by all the principals, including, in a nice surprise, William Hurt, who delivers a beautiful showboat of a performance late in the film, "A History of Violence" finds Mr. Cronenberg at the top of his form. Few directors working today know more about the erotics of screen violence than this filmmaker, who can make your head spin and your pulse quicken with a single edit. Fewer directors still bother to acknowledge that the canard "it's only a movie" is not only an article of bad faith, but also a deceptively comforting one. Movies, Mr. Cronenberg understands, make meaning: they entertain, therefore we are.  "A History of Violence" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has several  intense and bloody fight sequences, some adult sex scenes and strong language.

Apart from some effective detail work with classical American cinema archetypes that makes parts of it play like a modern-day Western, "A History of Violence" is a surprisingly conventional film from the normally more adventurously mind-bending David Cronenberg. A tale of a prototypically normal Middle American family put to the test by crime and a disruption of its very identity, pic is dominated by familiar themes hyped by an extra dash of hot sex and graphic violence. But lack of depth, complexity or strangeness make this a relatively routine entry for the director, indicating moderate B.O. prospects for New Line upon planned Sept. 30 release after fest rounds.
Adapted by Josh Olson from a graphic novel by John Wagner and Vince Locke, "Violence" reminds of another film with a similar source, "Road to Perdition," due to the central role of Irish-American gangsters. Buffs may also find elements of "Out of the Past," "Straw Dogs," "The Big Heat" and countless sagebrush dramas in the story and its treatment.
Westerns are most certainly drawn to mind by the impressive long opening take, which shows two bad guys (Stephen McHattie and Greg Bryk) emerging from a motel and speaking in the most taciturn manner about their plans. Leaving three dead bodies in their wake, the two take off for their next destination.
This happens to be Millbrook, Ind., a warm, picture perfect burg where great-looking couple Tom and Edie Stall (Viggo Mortensen and Maria Bello) live with their high school-age son Jack (Ashton Holmes) and little daughter Sarah (Heidi Hayes).
First scene that doesn't ring quite right is one in which Jack is hassled by a jerky jock for having made a routine catch of a fly ball the jock hit in a gym class baseball game. What did the bully expect him to do, drop the ball on purpose?
That Tom and Edie still have the hots for one another is friskily demonstrated in a raunchy scene in which they play teenager, with Edie donning a cheerleader's outfit as a preliminary.
But life as they know it comes to an end with the arrival of the baddies. Entering the diner Tom runs, one guy pulls out a gun while the other begins to rough up a waitress. Thinking fast, Tom tosses a hot coffee pot on the first man, grabs his gun and shoots both of them, while sustaining just a stab in the foot himself.
Tom is turned into a local hero, something this modest man of few words disdains. "Are you as sick of hearing about me as I am?," he asks his wife after seeing his mug all over TV.
But it turns out Tom may have reasons of his own for not wanting any publicity. A city slicker who talks thuggish and has one bad eye and heavy facial scars, Carl Fogarty (Ed Harris), shortly turns up with two goons at the diner and starts talking to Tom as if he knows him, calling him by the name Joey Cusack and reminding him of the old days in Philly.
Tom says he's not named Joey and has never been to Philly, but Carl continues to dog the family, following Edie and her daughter to a mall and finally showing up at the Stalls' remote home to insist that Tom come with him.
How this gets resolved out-does the diner scene in surprising violence and turns the rest of the film down a track that deals, although not in particularly interesting ways, with identity and family rifts, and leads to yet one more major, and bloody, stand-off.
Without knowing who made the film, one could say it's a very well crafted, slightly idiosyncratic look at some traditional American themes regarding the sanctity of family and the undercurrents beneath the surface people don't often like to disturb. But coming from Cronenberg, the question arises: Is that all there is? There's just not that much going on here, and what there is seems relatively ordinary, both on the domestic and gangster fronts.
Mortensen is solid and Gary Cooperish without revealing a great deal, while Bello goes considerably further to make tangible the love and the anguish Edie experiences. Harris and William Hurt, the latter as a mobster who turns up late in the proceedings, come out firing on all cylinders in very juicy turns.
Shot, as it happens, in Millbrook, Ontario, Canada, but looking for all the world like a south-of-the-border town, pic is well appointed in all departments except for the somewhat too insistent score by Howard Shore.

CANNES , FRANCE —The veterans showed their strength this year at Cannes. Still, the toughest movie I saw in competition, David Cronenberg 's droll and ruthless meta-thriller A History of Violence , came away empty-handed—just as Cronenberg's Spider  was ignored by the 2002 jury. What does it take? Beginning with Dead Ringers  (1988), or even The Fly (1986), Cronenberg has been, film for film, the most audacious and challenging narrative director in the English-speaking world. But then, Hou Hsiao-hsien —arguably the greatest narrative filmmaker working anywhere over the last 15 years—left Cannes without a prize as well.
Why is A History of Violence , set to open in the fall, so great? Freely adapted from John Wagner  and Vince Locke 's graphic novel (and apparently a work for hire), Cronenberg's movie manages to have its cake and eat it—impersonating an action flick in its staccato mayhem while questioning these violent attractions every step of the way.
A pair of cartoonishly good-looking normals (Viggo Mortensen  and Maria Bello ), living with their CGI-perfect children in a Disneyland -idyllic small town, are irrationally terrorized by a series of criminals, most impressively Ed Harris 's mutilated gangster. Tense and atmospheric, A History of Violence  is a hyper-real version of an early-'50s B-movie nightmare—albeit one where the narrative delicately blurs dream and reality, the performances slyly merge acting with role-playing, the location feels like a set, and blood always splatters from lovingly contrived prosthetic injuries.
A History of Violence  is deeply involving, although with its Hitchcockian "wrong man" theme and continual implication of the viewer, it's as coolly distanced as its title would suggest. Cronenberg's tone is too disconcertingly dry to be ironic and too scary to register as absurd. "It's not tongue-in-cheek," he remarked at his press conference. "It's funny." In a way, it's a successful version of Michael Haneke 's audience-bash ing Funny Games , and the overappreciative press screening audience drove one Viennese programmer to shout, "Stop laughing you fucking piece of shit critics and take this film serious!" It's a movie that could drive you crazy.
That was not the case with Lars von Trier 's Manderlay . The Danish bad boy, who created a stir at his last four Cannes film festivals, failed to provoke even his enemies with this immensely disappointing Dogville  sequel. Manderlay follows Grace, now played by a flustered Bryce Dallas Howard , to an Alabama plantation where slavery is still in effect. The road to hell is paved with good intentions: Grace sets out to right a wrong, using her father's gangsters for muscle. Manderlay  has something (not much) to say about race; more resonant, although soon dropped from the schema, is the parallel between Grace's enforced lessons in democracy and Bush's Iraq  adventure. Stunt-meister that he is, von Trier shouldn't repeat himself. The filmmaker uses Dogville 's formal devices to lesser effect and his boredom is contagious.
Nothing in competition was more warmly received than Jim Jarmusch 's Broken Flowers  . This Bill Murray  vehicle proved to be a mini-comeback for Jarmusch, who contained his sentimental hipsterism to produce a work as funny, lively, and sustained as anything in his career, albeit deepened by a new sense of melancholy.
Murray plays an aging and depressed bachelor who has a case of virtual paternity thrust upon him. He ventures out into America and back into his past, looking up his former flames. Each encounter is more grimly comic than the last. (If Murray is our iconic deadpan star, Broken Flowers  is his Seven Chances —in reverse.) The star's obvious indifference served to capsize The Life Aquatic ; here the master of the un-reaction shot and the non–double take carries an entire movie.
Jarmusch was the popular favorite. But no film journalist, myself included, could fault the jury too much for anointing Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne 's The Child . The streak the brothers began in 1996 with La Promesse  continues. By now, they have a style and set of interests as instantly recognizable as any filmmakers in the world—visceral camerawork, impeccable performances, a concern with Belgium 's dispossessed, an unlikely affinity for Robert Bresson . As Rosetta  remade Mouchette , so The Child  revisits Pickpocket . An infant is introduced to the world. His parents are homeless teenagers. The father, a hand-to-mouth hustler played by Jérémie Renier —the young son in La Promesse  and, it soon becomes evident, the movie's eponymous child—casually sells the baby and must scramble to recover him.
Typically, The Child  is structured as a series of tasks, culminating in a chase that, both metaphoric and intensely physical, is also a descent into the depths. The remarkable thing about the Dardennes is their complex single-mindedness. Each film is an odyssey (toward grace?) in a world that could hardly seem more material.
