
No one's going to argue that the 1986 psycho-thriller "The Hitcher" was a pillar of world cinema, but it had a scuzzy originality. The remake, by default, lacks even that. I don't think I've seen a movie with less reason to exist. 
The plot's just a campfire story, really: Guy picks up a hitchhiker who turns out to be a serial killer and maybe something more ghostly. Straight-up boogeyman stuff. Eric Red's teeth-clenched script for the 1986 film pitted C. Thomas Howell against a genuinely creepy Rutger Hauer as the villain, John Ryder, with Jennifer Jason Leigh as a friendly diner waitress/lunchmeat. The movie was crude but it worked, and you could believe Red was inspired by the old Doors song "Riders on the Storm" and the current of dread that runs through it. 
Here we get a young couple as generic as the cookie-cutter rock on the soundtrack: Jim (Zachary Knighton) and Grace (Sophia Bush, from the CW's "One Tree Hill" and the movie's real star as far as the target audience is concerned). They're cute, they bicker, they're boring as hell, and then they pick up Ryder in a storm, this time played by Sean Bean, Boromir from "The Lord of the Rings." 
It's as though director Dave Meyers (a music-video veteran) and writers Jake Wade Wall and Eric Bernt were trying an experiment: If you boil off dialogue, performance, narrative logic and grind a movie down to the nub of genre, will there be any suspense left? The answer is yes, but only in a Pavlovian sense. You react to this dull shockathon like a wired lab rat who's seen it all before. And guess what? You have. 
Bean (does he pronounce his name "shawn bonn" or "seen been"? I've often wondered) glowers implacably, while Knighton makes you pine for the thespic nuances of C. Thomas Howell. Bush gives good, shallow pluck and that's about it; when Grace and Jim stop at a Qwik-Mart and he asks "Ding Dong or Twinkie?," you think he's talking about her. 
The best performances in the film are given by Neal McDonough as a state cop in the requisite cowboy hat and Jim's 1970 Oldsmobile 442. Neither stick around nearly long enough. Horror movie purists will miss the french-fry-finger sight gag (and I do mean gag) while nodding at the pro forma twist on the original's infamous Mack truck gross-out scene. 
The most depressing part about all this is that "The Hitcher" has been made completely without style. Hasn't a career of Britney Spears and Creed videos taught the director anything?


In the veritable avalanche of product churned out by the horror retread assembly-lines these days, "The Hitcher" fails to make much of an impression. Typically, the cult classic 1986 original is gutted of all originality, sexual ambiguity and tension, leaving behind a generic chase between blandly heterosexual "good" and quasi-supernatural "evil." In the absence of actors with the tremendous presence of Rutger Hauer and Jennifer Jason Leigh, pic loses its raison d'etre
. Yet, directed by video helmer Dave Meyers with a certain fastidious distance from its plentiful gore, pic is also insufficiently over-the-top or corny to incite gleeful audience feedback. 
Scripters Jake Wade Wall and Eric Bernt have updated the setup -- not only has the lone male motorist now been replaced by a lovey-dovey couple, Jim (newcomer Zachary Knighton) and Grace (Sophia Bush, slipping her nubile body in and out of skimpy costumes even when under attack), but Jim is now relegated to the touchy-feely feminine role while Grace undergoes a (literal) trial by fire, emerging as a heroic, low-angled goddess with a pump-gun.
Indeed, pic almost reads like a female empowerment fable whereby Grace, with the help of enigmatic killer John Ryder (Sean Bean thanklessly thrust into the Rutger Hauer role), sheds her wimpy boyfriend for bigger and better things.
Remake is remarkable (given the original's wonderfully snarky homoerotic subtext) for the absolute lack of personality or chemistry among the actors (though the blond arrogance of Neal McDonough's state police lieutenant neatly mirrors the uncaring fearlessness of supervillain Ryder, as if the two were squaring off for a sequel).
Lead couple Grace and Jim are furnished with as bare a backstory as Adam and Eve, while Bean incarnates the arch-demonic killer only denotatively, with none of the sexual charisma that made Hauer's performance so disturbing.
But, perhaps most unforgivably, pic lacks suspense. The action scenes are directed credibly enough, but the nail-biting buildups and awful aftermaths are laid out mechanically and drained of emotional effect, characteristic of all the mass-produced recyclings of underground cult cheapies and bigger-budgeted fright films undertaken by Michael Bay's Platinum Dune label.
At one point, Bush falls asleep in a motel room, the passage of time measured by seemingly irrelevant scenes from the beginning and end of "The Birds" --- until the realization sets in that one is watching product placement for Bay's upcoming ornithological remake.
Basically, the film's strategy is to substitute iconic flesh-and-blood actors with stylized tableaux. But one shot of Leigh as a dead-end waitress at a truck-stop in the middle of nowhere in the 1986 version packed more pathos than carefully posed carfuls of dead, Bible-loving families, their kid's bloodstained "Will I Go to Heaven?" coloring-book fluttering in the wind.
Tech credits are mixed; lensing by James Hawkinson is suitably atmospheric but track's overdetermined song choices often annoy.   
