 How is this for loving postcoital pillow talk? “For a moment you sounded like a 12-year-old cheerleader.”  That kind of snidely witty remark characterizes the way everybody speaks in Rosser Goodman’s sour little film, “Holding Trevor.” It suggests that the budding relationship between Trevor (Brent Gorski), who works for an answering service in Los Angeles, and Ephram (Eli Kranski), a hospital intern, faces some hurdles.  Mr. Gorski, who wrote the screenplay, resembles a much younger Steve Buscemi. His pretentious voice-over narration wanders off into nowhere. The digital camera scours the actors’ blank faces (including Mr. Gorski’s) in extreme close-up, as though searching for substance that is nowhere to be found.  At least “Holding Trevor” has a story to tell. No sooner has Trevor’s heroin-addicted boyfriend Darrell (Christopher Wyllie) returned from rehab than he is caught using again. Fed up, Trevor ends the relationship, with tragic consequences, and begins dating Ephram, who admitted Darrell to the hospital after his last overdose. During their first extended conversation, Ephram invites Trevor to play a game in which they gaze at the city lights and invent imaginary lives for people behind the windows.  Trevor shares an apartment with Andie (Melissa Searing), a morose alcoholic who passes out during a party and awakes to discover she had sex with a stranger she can’t remember. Together Trevor; his promiscuous best friend, Jake (Jay Brannan); and Andie get tested for H.I.V. One comes back positive.  This portrait of 20-something gay men and their straight friends is a joyless exploration of middle-class deadbeats (with the exception of Ephram) lost in a torpid funk of low self-regard. Because they’re not rich, there is no sleazy zing of “Less Than Zero”-worthy glamor.  Within their circle their rudeness to one another may seem vaguely hip, but it makes you want to avoid their company at all cost.

Such an anomie-filled nothing of a movie that it wouldn't even be a pleasure to savage it. The Trevor of the title (Brent Gorski , who also wrote the screenplay) is trying to break away from his monstrous heroin addict of an ex-boyfriend, Darrell, while preserving a relationship with his difficult besties, Andie (Melissa Searing ) and Jake (Jay Brannan ), who constantly snipe at him and each other. When Darrell inevitably ODs, the emergency-room doctor turns out to be a hottie named Ephram (Eli Kranski ). Ephram and Trevor fall in love, fight, make up, etc. That's pretty much it, aside from a weirdly played HIV scare. Trevor's life is literally empty—he and Andie and Jake careen around L.A., but none of the locales they hit up seem to be inhabited by more than five people. I don't know if director Rosser Goodman  had a reason for this other than a lack of money in the budget to hire extras, but the effect is creepy. There's nothing to fill up the 88 minutes of the film except for the idle bitchery spewed by nearly every character. Are there really people out there who are so irredeemably nasty to their friends and lovers, while actually managing to keep them as friends and lovers?
