         From his home base in New Jersey to Louisiana, Texas, Alaska and Florida, novelist-turned-hyphenated filmmaker John Sayles has crisscrossed the country weaving sprawling stories in such films as "City of Hope," "Passion Fish," "Lone Star," "Limbo" and "Sunshine State." Unique among his peers, Sayles travels his own road dramatizing an Americana streaked with social realism and a touch of the magical.
 
 For "Honeydripper," Sayles' 16th film as a writer-director, he turns to the roots of rock 'n' roll for his subject and 1950 Alabama for his locale. A musical fable, the film uses his typically robust ensemble performances, crackling dialogue and a boogie-woogie soul to tell the story of a man facing a crossroads in the small town of Harmony.
 


         






   Tyrone "Pinetop" Purvis (Danny Glover) is a former blues piano player eking out a living from his tiny run-down juke joint, the Honeydripper Lounge, with the help of his wife Delilah (Lisa Gay Hamilton), stepdaughter China Doll (YaYa DaCosta) and right-hand man Maceo (Charles S. Dutton). The tunes that his regular live act, Bertha Mae (Dr. Mable John), belts out are a bit on the mournful side, and the Honeydripper's once rollicking crowds have moved on, lured by a more swinging club down the road.
 
 In conjuring the Jim Crow South, Sayles populates the film with archetypes, then subverts them by placing little narrative time bombs in their midst. Characters such as the enigmatic blind guitar picker  (Keb' Mo') and the corrupt sheriff (Stacy Keach) have an edge to them that challenges our expectations. Even a trio of cotton-picking field workers -- Dex (Sean Patrick Thomas), Ham (Eric Abrams) and Junebug (Kel Mitchell) -- possesses a brewing volatility that gives the story a powder keg of a bass line.
 
 From a passing freight train hops a shyly confident young man with a guitar in his hand and destiny on his side. Tired and hungry, Sonny Blake (Gary Clark Jr.) interprets the name Harmony as a good omen but is quickly put straight by a kindly railroad man who tells him that the only night he ever spent in jail was in a place called Liberty.
 
 Unbowed, Sonny turns up at the Honeydripper seeking a gig. Tyrone feeds him, then sends him on his way, preoccupied with a scheme to save the club. The end of an era weighs heavily on Tyrone, and he's just desperate enough to try anything.
 
 Tyrone gives Bertha Mae her notice and gambles everything on a one-night engagement of a relatively famous musician from New Orleans known as Guitar Sam. The problem is, Tyrone doesn't know if Sam will show or even what he looks like if he does.
 
 Everything builds toward the fateful Saturday night when Guitar Sam is scheduled to appear. As Tyrone's plan unravels and he's forced to improvise, Sayles carefully intertwines subplots that support and enhance the main story line. Meanwhile, Delilah faces a dilemma of her own, torn between remaining at her husband's side or committing further to the revival tent she has been frequenting.
 
 Sayles takes a practical aesthetic approach deploying Mike Leigh regular Dick Pope as his director of photography. Together with production designer Toby Corbett and costume designer Hope Hanafin, they get  their visual cues from the narrative and the music, creating a rich, down-to-earth environment where violence and magic seem equally possible.
 
 Music may be "Honeydripper's" most indelible element and Sayles and longtime collaborator, composer Mason Daring, seamlessly incorporate several original songs alongside the soundtrack's period tunes. All of the musical performers with the exception of Glover are actual musicians and the level of authenticity elevates the film.
 
 Changing times are a dominant theme in Sayles' work and most of his films put forth very specific social issues, but in "Honeydripper" these matters are mostly percolating beneath the surface. The film evocatively charts a time and place where change has been a longtime coming and buoyantly imagines a turning point where, at least musically, anything is possible.
 

 
 "Honeydripper." MPAA rating: PG-13 for brief violence and some suggestive material. Running time: 2 hours, 3 minutes. At Laemmle's Royal, 11523 Santa Monica Blvd., West L.A. (310) 477-5581; Laemmle's One Colorado, 42 Miller Alley (inside plaza, Fair Oaks Avenue at Union Street), Pasadena, (626) 744-1224; and Regal/Edwards Westpark 8, 3755 Alton Parkway, Irvine, (949) 622-8609.   

 “Honeydripper,” John Sayles’s shambling fusion of pop mythology and social mosaic, imagines the world-changing moment, around 1950, in the rural South when a blues guitarist first plugged in his ax and rocked the joint.  That cultural harbinger, Sonny Blake (Gary Clark Jr.), is an itinerant, freight-train-hopping young guitar wiz with no particular place to go, who stops off at the sleepy little town of Harmony, Ala. His instrument, cut from a solid woodblock and lacking a sound hole, emits rock ’n’ roll lightning at the Honeydripper, a dilapidated roadhouse on the verge of going out of business. Saturday night in America will never be the same.  Don’t go rushing to your rock encyclopedias for confirmation that any of this is scrupulously factual. Mr. Sayles, who wrote, directed and edited “Honeydripper,” is primarily interested in fusing archetypes from the Jim Crow South, both black and white, with mythic dimensions. An affable blind bluesman, Possum (Keb’ Mo’), whose enigmatic smile hints at his possession of secret knowledge, turns up now and again. Everywhere and nowhere at once, his elusive presence helps push the movie toward the realm of fable.  Sonny, an unknown, is passed off as Guitar Sam, a regional blues legend who is a last-minute no-show at the Honeydripper. The music made for the movie by Mr. Clark, a blues hotshot from Austin, Tex., with several albums to his credit, is proto-Chuck Berry, though not as distinctive.  All the characters and situations are familiar folkloric elements in a town where flimflammery is a way of life. Desperately in debt to his landlord, the Honeydripper’s owner, Tyrone  Purvis (Danny Glover), a former boogie-woogie pianist, steals the liquor destined for a rival club whose jukebox is driving him out of business.  Upon arrival in Harmony, Sonny is arbitrarily arrested for vagrancy by the white sheriff, Pugh (Stacy Keach), and dispatched to pick cotton on the plantation of Pugh’s crony, the local judge. On payday a plantation owner refuses to give a laborer his full wages simply for the pleasure of humiliating him. But the omnipresent threat of physical violence explodes only once in a black-on-black knife fight inside the Honeydripper.  While operating on a mythic level “Honeydripper” also wants to create the same kind of top-to-bottom social microcosm found in many of Mr. Sayles’s films. But this time his attempt to have his characters be simultaneously symbolic and real works at cross purposes. He is so uncomfortable writing dialogue in an old-time Southern argot that the conversations in “Honeydripper” rarely settle into the easy, colorfully idiomatic flow that has always been a hallmark of Southern speech.  Hard as they try to break through the stiffness, the film’s fine actors only fitfully succeed in camouflaging the machinery behind their characters. Two of the most familiar are a fluttery, white Southern matron, Amanda (Mary Steenburgen), who unwittingly condescends to her black maid, and an overweight black mama, Nadine (Davenia McFadden), with a dirty mind. Amanda comes straight from Tennessee Williams and Nadine from Bessie Smith.  Other one-note characters include a dignified, terminally weary blues singer, Bertha Mae (Mabel John), her devoted long-time consort Slick (Vondie Curtis Hall), Tyrone’s partner Delilah (Lisa Gay Hamilton), whose frustrations are driving her to explore Pentecostalism, and Tyrone’s best friend Maceo (Charles S. Dutton). Finally there is Tyrone’s angelic stepdaughter, China Doll (Yaya DaCosta), who becomes the inspiration for Sonny’s ultimate rock ’n’ roll blast.  “Honeydripper” is agreeable, well-intentioned and very, very slow. Sadly, it illustrates the difference between an archetype and a stereotype. When the first falls flat, it turns into the other and becomes a cliché.  The movie is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has strong language and one scene of violence.

John Sayles the storyteller and John Sayles the political progressive haven't always played well together, but, in the endearing musical time-piece "Honeydripper," the indie icon lets his narrative gifts take the lead and the social issues follow like a tight bass line. The result is one of Sayles' best films. The music, a mix of blues, seminal rock and newcomer Gary Clark Jr.'s performance, will be an obvious draw, as will the performances by some leading African-American actors. 
In'50s Alabama, the beleaguered Tyrone Purvis (Danny Glover) is deeply in debt and about to lose his roadhouse, the Honeydripper, when he gets a brainstorm: He'll book regional celebrity Guitar Sam to play the club, have the best Saturday night of his life and use the proceeds to pay off the landlord and the chicken man, and to get his nightclub out of hock.
The problem? Purvis doesn't have any money to book Guitar Sam, isn't sure where to find him, and doesn't know if he'd show up anyway. But Purvis steals a load of booze from the liquor man (a cameo by Sayles), and, despite the apprehensions of his buddy Maceo (Charles S. Dutton), starts putting up posters advertising Guitar Sam.
Everything is set up to build to a suspenseful Saturday night, which is effective because the population surrounding Purvis and the Honeydripper is such a well-cut cast of Southern characters. They include Tyrone's queenly house singer Bertha Mae (Dr. Mable John) and her consort Slick (Vondie Curtis Hall); the corpulent white sheriff Pugh (Stacey Keach), who keeps Purvis under constant duress; Purvis' beautiful stepdaughter China Doll (terrific newcomer Yaya DaCosta); and his wife Delilah (Lisa Gay Hamilton), who is having a struggle of the soul choosing between a charismatic church leader and her considerably less devout husband.
Into this mix comes the wandering Sonny Blake (Clark), an itinerant bluesman cut from the Robert Johnson legend, claiming to be as good a player as Guitar Sam and toting a guitar cut out of a solid block of wood. It's electric. No one's ever seen one -- which is no accident. The community around the Honeydripper is supposedly set in 1950s Alabama but it could be the '40s, '30s or '20s -- the point being that for Southern rural black America, not much changed for a long, long time.
Moviegoers may find politics if they want to in "Honeydripper," or they may just be drawn along by the story of a Saturday night when everything could go right or wrong. And no one's really sure until the end which way it's going to be.
Camera (color, 35mm), Dick Pope; music, Mason Daring; music supervisor, Tim Bernett; production designer, Toby Corbett; art director, Eloise Stammerjohn; set decorator, Alice Baker; costume designer, Hope Hanafin; makeup, Diane Maurno; sound (Dolby/SRD), Judy Karp; supervising sound editor, Phil Stockton; associate producers, Ira Deutchmann, Susan Kirr, Mark Wynns; assistant director, Cas Donovan; casting, John Hubbard. Reviewed at Duart Theater, New York, Aug. 9, 2007. (In Toronto Film Festival -- Special Presentations; San Sebastian Film Festival.) MPAA Rating: PG-13. Running time: 122 MIN.
 

