
Folks who live for the pull and snap of live flesh will have their share of sequences to cheer for in "Hostel," the new horror flick about two American backpackers who wind up snared in a wild Slovakian torture ring.
Written and directed by Eli Roth ("Cabin Fever"), the movie tells one of those nightmare-abroad tales, like "An American Werewolf in London" or "Eurotrip." Jocky and horny Paxton (Jay Hernandez) and bookish and virginal Josh (Derek Richardson) show up in Amsterdam and promptly hit the bong and cruise the nightclubs. They befriend an Icelander named Oli (Eythor Gudjonsson), insult the locals, get in fights, find hookers, and carry on with boorish joie de vivre.
Intolerant and bullying, Paxton causes most of the trouble, and the movie indulges his chauvinism and casual homophobia. Ever eager for easy women, he heeds the advice of an Eastern European who promises a place in Slovakia where there's ample opportunity for sex. Paxton, Oli, and Josh check into a hostel near Bratislava, and needless to say, not everyone checks out. Guests are whisked off to Ye Olde Dreary Dungeon of Horrors. Amid the howls of terror, bodies are impaled and digits cut.
"Hostel" is being sold as a Quentin Tarantino presentation, which seems a little disingenuous, even though it's true. Viewers expecting Tarantino's visual wit and cinematic verve are bound to feel rooked by Roth's gallows schlock. The "Tarantino presents" tag is meant to seduce a wider audience than saying, "from the dude who brought you 'Cabin Fever.' " Yet it doesn't rightly distinguish its maker from the hackwork of "They," "Fear Dot Com," and "Darkness Falls."
Roth seems to care enough about his movies to do a lot of his work on the set, not in the editing room, where most horror films are turned to gobbledygook in a last-ditch bid to drum up fright. "Hostel" is straightforward and classic-looking. The director is confident enough to advance a story with his camera and his actors.
In that sense, Roth fancies himself an old-school American moviemaker in the Wes Craven or Tobe Hooper mold -- a storyteller who happens to make films in which people are clawed and chainsawed. Acknowledging his Eastern god, Roth also tosses in a cameo from the ice-cool Japanese director Takashi Miike, whose psychotic "Audition" (1999) is a deserved cult treasure.
The problem is that the screenplay is scarcely developed enough to shed much light on anything. Even after an outré punch line is revealed, the film is neither shocking nor adequately terrifying. It could benefit from the twisted moral outrage and dramatic irony of the "Saw" pictures, which, unthinkably, attempt brief identifications with their torturer. "Hostel" is more persuasive as a dark-dark comedy.
The movie does get more involving in its latter half (the murderous street urchins are a delectable touch). That's only because, by that point, Roth has switched genres and started making an action thriller.
The trouble is that in Paxton we have a hero we don't like. Hernandez has been one of my favorite promising actors since he loved a druggy Kirsten Dunst in 2001's "crazy/beautiful," but in "Hostel" he's a pain, until the movie turns him into Sigourney Weaver.
By then it's too late. Part of you is rooting for this cocky American to lose more than a finger.
.


         It could be eye-opening to have film students construct a script entirely around the cautionary warnings assigned by the MPAA ratings board.
 
  Eyes are opened (and then some) in Eli Roth's latest carnival of dismemberment, "Hostel," which seems to have been tailored to its designated R "for brutal scenes of torture and violence, strong sexual content, language and drug use."
 


         






    Class, how can we fulfill the requirements of this something-for-everyone menu? Draw from your own life, if it helps.
 
  Drug use: Two hedonistic American students (Jay Hernandez, Derek Richardson) and a rabble-rousing twerp from Iceland (Eythor Gudjonsson) party down in Amsterdam. Smoke gets in their eyes.
 
  Language: If it's crude, say it loud and often.
 
  Strong sexual content: The Amsterdam red-light district has its charms but nothing to compare with the pleasure districts of Slovakia, where the babes are bountiful, eager and don't bust the budget.
 
  Brutal scenes of torture and violence: The boys visit an art installation. When you've been besieged by conflicts as long as Eastern Europe has, you have to take your art materials where you can find them. Drills, chain saws and axes will do in a pinch.
 
  Writer-director Roth made a blood-splash in 2002 with his cheap debut film "Cabin Fever." He has lost none of his gift for oozing anatomy now that he has earned the producing imprimatur of Quentin Tarantino, who seems to be positioning himself as the Roger Corman of the next generation of cine-sadists.
 
  Although I spent much of the second half staring into my lap while listening to a cacophony of screams and shop tools, I processed enough of the first to appreciate Roth's sinister evocation of a Slovakian provincial town (the roaming kids' gangs are a great touch) and his talent for informing an American tourist's disorientation with a palpable sense of menace.
 
  *
 
 
Jan Stuart is a film critic for Newsday.
 
 
*
 
  'Hostel'
 
 MPAA rating:
 R for brutal scenes of torture and violence, strong sexual content, language and drug use
 
  A Lionsgate release. Director Eli Roth. Producers Mike Fleiss, Eli Roth, Chris Briggs. Executive producers Boaz Yakin, Scott Spiegel, Quentin Tarantino. Screenplay by Eli Roth. Director of photography Milan Chadima. Editor George Folsey Jr. Production and costume design Franco-Giacomo Carbone. Running time: 1 hour, 35 minutes.
 
  In general release.   

Sadism was once an element in horror films. Now it's more or less the only element, with the fear of death replaced by the fear of torture — a fate worse than death. The new megaplex sado-thrillers, like Hostel , strive for the sensation of reality-based dread: the feeling that it's you, the poor viewer, who's being strapped into that chair or hung up on that meat hook, as a sweat-soaked creep in a leather apron approaches your face with a power drill. The decor? Late medieval dungeon, with a soupçon of smeared bathroom tile. Are we having fun yet?
In Hostel , directed by Eli Roth and coexecutive-produced by Quentin Tarantino, a trio of jerky collegiate dudes, two (Jay Hernandez and Derek Richardson) from the U.S. and one (Eythor Gudjonsson) from Iceland, cruise the discos and hash bars of QT's mythical haunt, Amsterdam, in search of eager babes. Then, acting on a tip, they travel to a place in which the action is even hotter: Slovakia, where a rusty, dead-zone village is the site of a youth hostel brimming with curvy Eastern European girls who line up, between visits to the nude spa, to meet any posh Western tourist. It's obligatory for a horror film to feature exploitative sex as an appetizer, but Roth, even as he fulfills the sleaze imperative, does something shrewder: He mocks his heroes, presenting them as cold-eyed horndog jerks who fail to see that they've wandered into an entire country of exploitation, a land where no one has any money and therefore everything is for sale.
Including mutilation for fun. Having tasted the charms of the former Soviet empire, our dude heroes get sold off, one by one, to the local warehouse dungeon, where for a mere $25,000 clients can arrange to torture and kill someone in any way they fancy. What's disturbing about this scenario is its patina of plausibility: You may or may not believe that slavering redneck psychos, of the kind who leer through Rob Zombie's The Devil's Rejects , can be found in the Southwest, but it's all too easy to envision this sort of depravity in the former Soviet bloc, the crack-up of which has produced a brutal marketplace of capitalistic fiendishness. The torture scenes in Hostel  (snipped toes, sliced ankles, pulled eyeballs) are not, in essence, much different from the surgical terrors in the Saw  films, only Roth, by presenting his characters as victims of the same world of flesh-for-fantasy they were grooving on in the first place, digs deep into the nightmare of a society ruled by the profit of illicit desire.

 Like many an ugly American before them, Paxton (Jay Hernandez) and Josh (Derek Richardson) are backpacking across Europe in search of loose women,  legal drugs and opportunities to bark obscenities at the locals. The first half of "Hostel," the  horror film by Eli Roth ("Cabin Fever"), is devoted to the stupid shenanigans of these repellent yahoos as they lurch from town to town, sucking down bong hits  and staggering through red-light districts saying things like, "I hope bestiality is legal in Amsterdam because that chick is a hog!" Charming.  The second half asks us to sympathize with them as they're snared in an underground Slovakian snuff club and graphically tortured by sadistic Euro crazies. It isn't easy.  Inspired by the brutal exploitation  pictures of the 1970's and the nasty new breed of Asian horror films, "Hostel" is motivated by an adolescent urge to shock. And while it's true that no civilized person will remain unscathed by the film's relentless bigotry  - this is one of the most misogynistic films ever made  -  Mr. Roth's gory spectacles are too calculated to deliver the transgressive  jolts they so obviously  seek.  A cameo appearance by Takashi Miike, the intermittently brilliant director of genre freakouts like "Ichi the Killer" and "Izo," drives home the essential timidity of Mr. Roth's vision. For all his vivid outrages and considerable filmmaking chops, he isn't pushing boundaries or unearthing fresh hells of the imagination. At the end of the day, if you've seen one  psychopath go to work in a basement abattoir, you've seen them all.  "Hostel" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It pushes the category to the limit with nonstop profanity, bigotry, drug use, nudity and a great deal of extremely graphic torture, dismemberment and murder.

With a style as high as its body count -- plus the imprimatur of gore connoisseur and presenting entity Quentin Tarantino -- "Hostel" may become something of a classic among Fangoria magazine's readership, acolytes of George Romero and audiences who thought "Saw II" was for babies. Translation to the small screen will be all but impossible given the rain of corpuscles, but theatrical and DVD should spur a moderate downpour. And the aptly termed "director's cut" is all but inevitable.
One of the better looking horror films of recent vintage, "Hostel," which showed as a work in progress as a midnighter at the Toronto Film Festival, begins as a dream and turns into a nightmare. Two college pals -- Josh (Derek Richardson) and Paxton (Jay Hernandez) -- are backpacking across Europe with an Icelander, Oli (Eythor Gudjonsson), whom they met en route, and pull into Amsterdam for a siege of epic drinking, pot smoking and, hopefully, sex. While there, they are told they should travel to Bratislava, where the Slovakian women are crazy about foreigners, especially Americans. They're just not told how crazy.
Writer-director Eli Roth's previous entry in the horror genre, "Cabin Fever," was about young sex-crazed vacationers attacked by a flesh-eating virus. While never quite sure whether or not it was a parody of itself, "Cabin Fever" had a refreshing degree of unhinged gruesomeness. Likewise, "Hostel."
Roth apparently based his film on a story about a Thai Internet business through which, for $10,000, one could kill another human being (the victims being so impoverished they were willing to die for their heirs). Roth has moved the tale to an Eastern Europe portrayed the way Transylvania was in a 1930s vampire film, with lascivious beauties intent on seducing and drugging their unwitting American dates so they can be fed into the machinery of recreational death.
Unfortunately, Roth doesn't let us in on what's really happening until very late in the game, so much of the violence appears utterly gratuitous and implausible. That there is a motive -- money -- doesn't figure in until well after a number of limbs and torsos have been amputated and eviscerated, and the dramatic momentum has been stymied.
Wisely, perhaps, Roth has given us principal characters who are dislikable enough so that the threat of their imminent demise isn't all that troubling. Oli is a lout, Paxton is a foul-mouthed fratboy and Josh is a social incompetent -- characteristics which should have clued them in a lot earlier that something was amiss when Miss Slovakia and her first runner-up (Barbara Nedeljakova, Jana Kaderabkova) come on to them so strongly.
But such are the delusions of characters in horror movies who don't realize that they're going to be chopped meat even when they can hear the hum of the chainsaw in their ears.

Falling somewhere between fratboy porno wish fulfillment and Europhobic sex-tourism scare flick, Eli Roth 's taut, wily, but ultimately pointless shocker Hostel  is neither as transgressive nor as grueling as it aims to be. The setup is pure urban legend: While backpacking through Europe, obnoxiously American lads Paxton (Jay Hernandez ) and Josh (Derek Richardson ) get wind of a former Soviet bloc backwater pension where easy sex is as assured as lukewarm coffee, stale croissants, and mattress cooties. Once there, however, they discover that their cooz nirvana is actually bait for potential victims of an international snuff ring. Creative butchery ensues.
Hostel  is more sophisticated than Roth's jokey, derivative Cabin Fever  (2002), and plays keenly on Yank xenophobia via queasy allusions to Hammer's '60s pop-gothic potboilers, their harsher Italian and German kin, and such real-life horrors as the Holocaust and, briefly, post-A-bomb Hiroshima . (Cinematographer Milan Chadima and production designer Franco-Giacomo Carbone  deserve credit here.) But the film is too casually misanthropic and enamored of its expulsive prosthetic virtuosity to be politically relevant, and it's not clear what response—shame? outrage? titillation?—Roth is after. He's not assured enough a satirist to provide a piercing or timely indictment of Americans abroad, and the result is a near-standard stalk-and-slash movie with virtually nothing to say about the commodified cruelty in which it wallows. Maybe Roth should direct somebody else's screenplay next time around, although it's far from certain that he'd resist his bodily-fluid gimmickry even then.
