
No one in the movies manages a look of stupefaction and bliss the way Anna Faris does. I've seen Johnny Depp and Cameron Diaz attempt it, but Faris seems possessed by the shock of anticipation. Shelley, the blond Playboy Mansion dolt Faris plays in "The House Bunny," has a birthday blowout where an obscenely giant cake is wheeled her way. She looks up at it, and her awe practically glows: I'm gonna have to eat the whole thing!
But it's hard to build an entire comedy out of that face, and the men and women who've cobbled together "The House Bunny" give up trying. Faris plays her usual lunatic-idiot. This time her hard-working caricature inches closer to the proportions of an actual human being. Shelley finds herself evicted from the Mansion. The goodbye letter cites her old age. (She just turned 27, which someone explains is "59 in Bunny years.") She drifts for a few scenes until she ends up at a sorority whose unpopularity has put it on the college's endangered list.
A gander around the premises explains everything. The sorority's sad creatures are like refugees from the ultimate Dickens novel: a miserable, socially and cosmetically backward group. One girl (Rumer Willis) wears a body brace. Another (Kiely Williams) has never spoken. There's not much proof they've ever seen daylight, and excusing the one pregnant girl (Katharine McPhee), it's hard to believe they've made contact with the opposite sex - or any sex, for that matter. It's Bleakest House.
Shelley hops to the rescue. The girls try to attack her with their feminism, but nothing can stop the makeovers, ritual-theme bashes (virgin sacrifice!), and seduction tips. It's that type of movie - the nerds and freaks are turned into centerfolds. The joke, though, is not on the women. It's on sexiness itself - what it is and where it comes from and who responds to it.
The best development in Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith's script, though, comes after a nice guy (Colin Hanks) asks Shelley out, and her tips don't work on nice, smart guys. They're for pigs. Standing over a steaming manhole twirls up her dress, but it also scalds her legs and who knows what else. So the girls have to educate her. And the sight of Shelley sliding across a library floor scouring for knowledge in great big books is exciting, a little bit like how Judy Holliday came to her senses in "Born Yesterday." It's nice to see a movie where a woman shows her sisters how to loosen up and how those women, once they're relaxed, show her how to have a little dignity.
Faris plays a willing student. She and the ladies of the house - the wonderful Kat Dennings and the even better Emma Stone play the two with the most scenes - are individually funny. But the film is also interesting for its starlet funhouse quality. Faris often seems as though she's going for Britney Spears. Dennings is like a gothy Hilary Duff. And Stone comes across as the goofy Lindsay Lohan you could take home to mother. Add to this one Cheetah Girl (Williams), Tom Hanks's son, and the daughter of Bruce and Demi (Willis), and the movie achieves a kind of pop surrealism.
It doesn't achieve much else. It doesn't turn any corners, it's lazy, and it's content to keep playing dumb long after it's really funny - "Illegally Blonde." The real reason Shelley has been tossed from the house (it's not actually her age) goes nowhere. It would have been nice to see the movie push past cute gags and into more adult ones. Impossibly, Shelley wakes up from her birthday party alone with piles of pillows in her bed. Maybe wishing for something more comically lascivious than cleavage is silly. But the movie is a commercial for Hugh Hefner that makes his magazine seem like Seventeen.


 All hail Anna Faris, fake bimbo par excellence, master of the birdbrained double take, our reigning queen of intelligent stupidity. On the sneaker-clad heels of “Smiley Face,” an inspired stoner farce from 2007, come the plastic stiletto shenanigans of “The House Bunny,” a breezy, ditzy comedy about the misadventures of a Playboy bunny exiled from the chinchilla cocoon of Hugh Hefner’s mansion.  What’s a bunny to do? For Shelley Darlingson (Ms. Faris), it’s a pep-stepping, breast-jiggling hippity-hop to the next best thing to chez Playboy: the sisterhood of the sorority.  Rejected from the requisite house full of class-obsessed brats, Shelley falls in with the obligatory clutch of “ugly girls,” a ragtag tribe of crypto-lesbians, semi-midgets, clueless nerds and sarcastic anarchists. OMG, no wonder Zeta Alpha Zeta is about to be closed down for lack of pledges and heinous crimes against footwear. Makeover time! And ladies, don’t forget, “The eyes are the nipples of the face.”  Directed by Fred Wolf from a screenplay by the writers of “Legally Blonde,” Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, “House Bunny” puts a cheerful spin on its many clichés. This particular wheel hasn’t been reinvented, but at least it gets a nice fresh coat of bubblegum-pink paint and a star to pilot it with aplomb.

It's a little stroke of genius: Make a female-empowerment movie and cast it with Playboy Bunnies. Elevated via a strong script by "Legally Blonde" scribes Kirsten Smith and Karen McCullah Lutz, "The House Bunny" is a blissfully broad comedy that should catapult Anna Faris into a singular kind of stardom -- she's funny, she's sexy, and her movie distinguishes itself grandly from a mostly gore-and-groin-fixated summer comedy season. Titles are sometimes dumped in mid- to late August, but good buzz could help this Fred Wolf-directed laffer break out beyond its young-femme target audience. 
Best known for her work in the "Scary Movie" franchise and her stoner turn in last year's "Smiley Face," Faris plays Shelley Darlingson, a Bunny who resides in paradise -- aka the Playboy Mansion, from which she is summarily dismissed one day for unknown reasons. Suddenly homeless, and devoid of survival skills outside what "God and Dr. Borkman gave me," Shelley stumbles upon the Zeta Alpha Zeta sorority house, a place that seems like it could have once been inhabited by a certain Miss Havisham.
The house's inhabitants are the worst collection of gothic geekettes assembled since Tod Browning was making movies. But inside each Zeta girl is a babe (or quasi-babe) waiting to happen. And since the house is about to be sold out from under its members -- thanks in part to the scheming witches of Phi Iota Mu -- Shelley is appointed house mother and has to help the girls quickly find their inner vamps, attract new members and keep the sorority from going the way of the whalebone corset.
That the script was written for Faris (who shares exec producer credits with the pic's scribes) is evident: Shelley is a guileless tomato-with-a-heart-of-gold, and Faris dances delicately between her pure sweetness and hilarious ineptitude, never making the character an object of ridicule but never pretending she's a genius, either. The easy comparison is to Marilyn Monroe -- Faris, a bombshell, effects the same soft voice and endearing cluelessness. But Shelley has a lot more angles than most of Monroe's characters, and the place Faris has carved out for herself is inseparable from her own particular talents and personality.
Just as Faris walks a tightrope, so does the story: Shelley is, after all, encouraging the sorority girls -- the caustic arch-feminist Mona (Kat Dennings); the sweet, socially inept Natalie (Emma Stone); the very pregnant (it's never explained) Harmony (Katharine McPhee); the back-brace-wearing Joanne (Rumer Willis) -- to make room in their lives for makeup, men and parties.
What saves the intellectual day is Shelley's relationship with good guy Oliver (Colin Hanks): For all the helpful advice she gives her girls, Shelley doesn't know how to develop a normal relationship with a normal man. The Faris-Hanks scenes provide Faris with some of her better moments and keeps "The House Bunny" from becoming bimbo propaganda.
"My head's pounding like a nail," says a stressed-out Shelley at one point, and the only thing that might have auds feeling likewise is the rousing, unrelenting soundtrack put together by Michael Dilbeck. (Waddy Wachtel composed the original music). It's unnecessary embellishment: The female cast is a joyous little ensemble, with the gift of good lines and the ability to deliver them with energy.
Production values are first-rate.
