In How About You  a restless, dissatisfied young lady (The Duchess ' Atwell) gains perspective on life by working as a housekeeper among restless, dissatisfied older ladies at a genteel retirement residence that appears to be an English outpost of a Hollywood home for the aged. (Shortcut to happiness: sharing martinis, reefers, and singalongs with the oldies.) As the reigning inhabitant, Redgrave adopts the swanning gestures of Maggie Smith in this mild adaptation of a Maeve Binchy story. Other drama queens enjoying the opportunity to screech include Imelda Staunton, Brenda Fricker, and Joss Ackland as the lone growling man about the house.

A good scolding and a toke on a joint: that’s all it takes to turn the curmudgeonly old folks in “How About You” into goofy pussycats frolicking on the lawn of their comfy retirement home. Would that it were so easy to transform those angry, embittered elders  into a happy family. But as Vanessa Redgrave, Joss Ackland, Brenda Fricker and Imelda Staunton chew up the scenery, you may be half-convinced that such miracles can occur. When portrayed by fine actors, Ebenezer Scrooge can metamorphose into Bob Cratchit and the Wicked Witch of the West into Glinda  the Good Witch. The movie, set in Ireland at Christmastime, takes its title from the 1941 Burton Lane-Ralph Freed standard that begins, “I like New York in June.”  Heard over the opening credits in a mediocre, bowdlerized version by Bobby Darin and repeated incessantly,  it’s the favorite ditty of Georgia Platts (Ms. Redgrave), a former showgirl who wears a turban and gives imperious directions on how to fix the martinis to which she is avidly addicted. The song, which eventually becomes a jolly singalong in an Irish pub, also helps thaw the frozen souls of Donald Vanston (Mr. Ackland), a widower and retired judge who demands his breakfast be served at 5:30, two and a half hours ahead of schedule; and Heather and Hazel Nightingale (Ms. Fricker and Ms. Staunton), bickering spinster sisters who are continually at each other’s throats as they recycle old family grievances. These  four are the only residents of Woodlands,  a residential home, who have not vacated the premises for the Christmas holidays.  While Kate (Orla Brady), the strict owner, is away, it is up to her younger sister Ellie (Hayley Atwell), a wild Irish rose, to keep order.  The four are holy terrors whose bad behavior has driven away so many lodgers that Woodlands’ very existence is threatened. The achievement of peace and harmony depends on the success of a proposed Christmas dinner that becomes a modest British answer to “Babette’s Feast.” “How About You,” directed by Anthony Byrne from Jean Pasley’s screen adaptation of a short story by Maeve Binchy, belongs to the sentimental genre of post-Terence Rattigan white-glove British dramas like “Mrs. Palfrey at the Claremont” and “Ladies in Lavender.” If those two predecessors have a little more substance than “How About You,” all three appeal to the delicate  palates  of an audience that craves the movie equivalent of tea and biscuits:  stiff upper lips conceal hearts of gold, and all psychological conflicts are resolved with tearful confessions of vulnerability. To that audience, which has little stomach for barbarity, this genre is a godsend, because it offers the consolations of civilized conversation in complete sentences and cultural name-dropping. The retired judge, a recovering alcoholic whose greatest regret is not having sobered up while he was married, plays Satie on the piano and hums a theme from “Die Fledermaus.” There is a half-baked subplot involving Ellie’s unseen boyfriend that appears to have been mostly left on the cutting-room floor. When a resident regales Ellie with tales of her happy days smoking hashish in Morocco, Ellie immediately bakes some hash-laced cookies, but Kate finds them and throws them away. When that Bobby Darin recording is first heard on the soundtrack, with its references to Kennedy and “a Bernstein tune,” you are misled into thinking the movie is a period piece set in the 1960s. But  if there is just enough modern technology to set the movie’s time as now, on a deeper level, the era it depicts is really then.

There comes a time when every celebrated actor is called upon to play the adorable, misbehaving old coot. That date has apparently arrived for Vanessa Redgrave, Imelda Staunton, Brenda Fricker and Joss Ackland, who knock off codger roles in "How About You ... " with hammy brio. This adapted story by Irish literary populist Maeve Binchy co-stars Hayley Atwell as a youthful staffer stuck minding four obnoxious residents during an Irish luxury rest home's Christmas holidays. Comedic and sentimental beats are as predictable as the storytelling is sloppy. Nonetheless, this rare formulaic crowdpleaser likely will draw older audiences in most English-language territories.
Young widow Kate (Orla Brady) is the harried owner/manager of an elder-care facility housed in a beautiful old County Wicklow mansion. Despite the pristine rural setting, however, there's plenty of discord, especially from four cranky, demanding tenants.
There's Georgia (Redgrave), a flamboyant ex-showgirl with a major martini habit, and willfully boorish retired judge Donald (Ackland). Quarrelsome yet inseparable sisters Hazel (Staunton) and Heather (Fricker) aren't really old enough to be here, but have led such sheltered lives that, after their mother died, they moved in to continue avoiding the outside world.
Turning up unannounced is Kate's younger sibling, Ellie (Atwell), who needs cash and expects long-suffering sis to provide temporary employment. They frequently clash, Kate being a humorless workaholic, while university dropout Ellie has a history of irresponsibility. But the arrangement squeaks by, Ellie even striking up a friendship with Alice (the late Joan O'Hara, to whom pic is dedicated), a frail resident at the tail end of her "charmed life."
When Yuletide approaches, nearly all staff and inhabitants leave to spend the holidays elsewhere. All except the impossible four, who've either alienated or outlived anyone who'd have them as guests. A crisis in Kate's own family forces her to leave the inexperienced Ellie in charge. This turn of events occurs about halfway through, bringing some situational focus to hitherto meandering and fragmentary progress.
Ellie's charges at first treat her like 24-hour room service, but when she has finally had enough, they actually make an effort to get along. Inhibition-loosening alcohol, revelations of personal tragedy, and plain old Christmas spirit do the rest.
There's little subtlety displayed or required in this predictable warming of curmudgeonly hearts. But one could wish some of the care put into pic's attractive widescreen images had been expended on its haphazard storytelling, which is alternately digressive and evasive; there's a particularly odd "scene missing" stretch when Ellie breaks up with a b.f. Continuity curiosities likewise abound -- seasons seem to change from scene to scene.
Still, auds in the mood for a feel-good pic with familiar faces will likely overlook such flaws to enjoy the cranky comedics and warm-'n'-fuzzies that arrive on cue. Helmer Anthony Byrne ("Short Order") nails the desired overall tone of Richard Curtis-style sugarplum dramedy, even if, in script and editorial terms, "How About You ... " is far from fine-tuned. Veteran thesps deliver duly colorful turns, though the weakish material doesn't help them create any indelible characters.
Physical production is first-rate, with a confectionary look achieved by lenser Des Whelan, production designer Tom McCullough and the gorgeous locations used. Niall Byrne's score lays it on thick whenever the soundtrack isn't making extensive use of mostly pre-rock oldies like the titular Tin Pan Alley standard.
Camera (color, Panavision widescreen), Des Whelan; editor, Emma E. Hickox; music, Niall Byrne; production designer, Tom McCulloch; art director, Brendan Rankin; set decorator, Jenny Oman; costume designer, Hazel Webb-Crozier; sound (Dolby Digital), Ray Cross; assistant director, Kevan Barker; casting, Nuala Moiselle, Frank Moiselle. Reviewed at Mill Valley Film Festival (World Cinema), Oct. 10, 2008. Running time: 91 MIN.
 



Again with the grumpy old geezers burnished into old dears just in time for Christmas by a rosy young beauty with problems of her own? The twist here being that the embittered seniors languishing in a down-at-heel Irish retirement home appear to be former flower children, on account of them swearing like troopers and whipping out the tokes whenever Authority leaves the room. It was surely shrinking employment opportunities in British film rather than the caliber of the material that attracted such a stellar cast to this ensemble piece adapted from a short story by Maeve Binchy , a superior pop-fiction writer widely read by my mum and her friends. When Pat O'Connor  made a movie out of a Binchy novel, the charming 1995 Circle of Friends , it launched the admittedly brief career of Minnie Driver . Though capably enough directed by Anthony Byrne , I can't see How About You  doing anything for Hayley Atwell  (Brideshead Revisited , The Duchess ) that she hasn't already done for herself. As Rosy Young Beauty, she pluckily holds her own against the best in the business—Vanessa Redgrave  as a boozy faded screen star, Imelda Staunton  and Brenda Fricker  as sheltered spinsters put away before their time, and Joss Ackland  as an angry widower waiting to die. But the only crowds this stodgy little movie is likely to please tend to be home on a Saturday night, watching PBS.
