The sexual joke in the wily indie comedy Humpday  involves a couple of straight guys, old college pals a decade out of school, who, after a night of stag partying among free-loving lesbian babes, make a plan to have sex together on camera as their transgressive entry in an amateur porn contest. Ben (Mark Duplass, mainstay of the mumblecore school of shambling, talk-driven relationship dramas like The Puffy Chair ) is a married, working homeowner; Andrew (The Blair Witch Project 's Joshua Leonard) is a single wanderer and would-be artist. How would two hetero dudes, you know, do it ? And if they did it, could the sex be classified as, maybe, beyond gay? Beyond porn? Would such a movie count as...art? And, oh, by the way, what would Ben's wife, Anna, say?
Anna's thoughts matter because, as played by the wonderfully nuanced newcomer  Alycia Delmore, the no-bull responses of this perceptive woman are a key to Humpday 's sly, wised-up feminist outlook. Writer-director Lynn Shelton sweetly, mischievously tracks Ben and Andrew as they jaw, shoot hoops, roughhouse, and hug it out. But for the filmmaker to speak truth, all Anna has to do is give her husband an exasperated look far too realistic to appear in any porn movie. A–


 To guys everywhere: “Humpday” has your number. With X-ray vision, this serious indie comedy, written and directed by Lynn Shelton, sees through its male characters’ macho pretensions to contemplate the underlying forces hard-wired into men’s psyches in a homophobic culture. Think of it as a Judd Apatow or Kevin Smith buddy film turned inside out.  It is all the more remarkable for having been conceived by an empathetic woman with no apparent ax to grind and a sensibility tuned to the minutiae of straight-male bonding rituals. Men may be from Mars and women from Venus, but some observant Venusians understand the brute fundamentals of Martian psychology.  Its subjects, schlubby, soft-bellied Ben (Mark Duplass) and bearded, laughing-eyed Andrew (Joshua Leonard), are best friends from college who fancied themselves latter-day disciples of Dean Moriarty and Sal Paradise from “On the Road.” A decade later Ben, a transportation engineer with a house in Seattle and a warm, supportive wife, Anna (Alycia Delmore), who is trying to become pregnant, has abandoned whatever romantic beatnik fantasies he once nurtured to pursue a staid middle-class existence.  Andrew, still a free-spirited rogue and artist (at least in his own mind), hasn’t landed yet, and a lurking anxiety about his future is beginning to leak through his twinkling bohemian swagger. He reappears in Ben’s life late one night after Ben and Anna have gone to bed following a botched baby-making opportunity. Andrew, just back from Mexico, needs a place to stay. As the friends exchange hugs, punches and raucous dude slang, instant regression sets in.  The next night Andrew invites Ben to a wild party given by a bisexual woman (Ms. Shelton) he has just met. As the liquor flows and joints are smoked, Ben forgets Anna is at home cooking a special pork-chop dinner. Several of the guests are associated with Humpfest, a film festival devoted to experimental homemade pornography. In a daredevil moment, Andrew and Ben, feeling pressured to demonstrate they are  unflappably cool, hip swingers, announce they have thought up “the ultimate art project.” They will film themselves — two straight guys  — having sex. In the language of their pitch: “It’s not gay; it’s beyond gay. It’s not porn; it’s art.”  Even in the cold light of morning, when the terrifying prospect of making good on their promise looms, they are unable to back down. There is also the troubling question of how to explain all this to Anna.  As the put-up-or-shut-up moment in a Seattle hotel room approaches, “Humpday” explores the ramifications of their decision in a free-form Mumblecore style. Much of the dialogue in a film that rarely stops talking was semi-improvised, and as Ben and Andrew, who are perfectly cast, consider the fine print of their verbal agreement, most of what they say sounds convincingly spontaneous. For starters there is the matter of role playing, a question that is too daunting to explore when the subject is broached.  “Humpday” is utterly lacking in titillation. Although Ben remembers a confused momentary attraction to a male video-store clerk years earlier, there is no intimation of any lurking erotic subtext in their friendship. And in a revealing moment Andrew, about to have a threesome with the party hostess and her girlfriend, loses his nerve when they produce an array of sex toys.  Under his free-spirited, anything-for-a-lark pose he is deeply conventional. A question the movie doesn’t address is how Ben and Andrew imagine they can complete the project without any sexual attraction between them.  The camera’s view of the characters, although intimate, is almost antiseptic. The film sees Ben and Andrew the way they see each other: as blobs of flesh with hairy parts but without the tiniest suggestion of latent heat. Neither Ben nor Andrew is especially good looking (in a beauty contest, Andrew would probably win), but neither is ugly.  I won’t reveal what transpires when they keep their date, except to say that the movie’s unblinking observation of a friendship put to the test is amused, queasy making, kindhearted and unfailingly truthful.    “Humpday” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations.

Moving one step beyond "Zack and Miri Make a Porno" into transgressive sex comedy territory, "Humpday" is a visually mangy but frequently hilarious low-budgeter about two straight buddies who try to rise to the challenge of performing together in an amateur porn video. Although its subject matter and slapdash look will limit it to indie-friendly auds, Lynn Shelton's vibrant third feature could actually prove to be a fun date-night attraction with edge-seeking young viewers of all persuasions.
Shot in a manner that feels as improvised as the dialogue, "Humpday" nonetheless possesses a comic structure as rigorous as any "I Love Lucy" episode. Shelton extensively outlined every scene and worked out the characters with her skilled actors, who were then turned loose to provide the words.
It's a risky approach that's turned out well here, applied to a gamey high concept. From the opening shot of Ben (Mark Duplass) and wife Anna (Alycia Delmore) enjoying a little intimate bed talk, Shelton frames the action to emphasize physical contact, and it's the potential of physicality of a very particular kind that gives the film its special comic anxiety.
Exploding into Ben and Anna's scrumptious domestic bliss is an incendiary device who goes by the name of Andrew (Joshua Leonard). A rambunctious hipster who'd be happy to learn he's the reincarnation of Jack Kerouac, Andrew shows up unannounced in the middle of the night after a long absence and, the next evening, takes his old college buddy to a bohemian party awash in booze, drugs and polymorphous sexuality.
In the extremis of their altered states, Ben and Andrew figure they'll re-cement their old bond by entering a Seattle homemade sex film festival called Humpday with a video in which they would get it on. Deliriously embraced by the little gathering as an idea that's "beyond gay," the project takes on the air of a macho contest that it would be wimpy to back out of; although none of the details are verbalized, each man naturally assumes he'll be the one to "do" the other one.
Unlike many films with improvised dialogue, this one boasts sharp comic timing along with lively, realistic talk that keeps deepening the comic quagmire the boys create for themselves. Arguable comic highlights are a scene in which Ben fumblingly attempts to solicit support from his wife for his desire to assist Andrew with his "art" project, then another in which Andrew drunkenly spills the beans to Anna about the nature of her husband's involvement.
Delmore's reactions to all this are captivatingly humorous, and her delineation of the young wife's attempts to be broadminded while fuming with disbelief lifts the film above the basic level of immature male shenanigans. 
Determined to go through with it, the two men, who are scruffily attractive in a student way while showing signs of sliding toward middle-age paunch, meet for the big event in an antiseptic hotel room; the way things play out mixes discomfort, humor and honesty in equal measure.
As guys devoted to male bluster, high times, go-with-the-flow evasion and occasional emotional leveling, Duplass and Leonard are good company and very entertaining in their interplay. Duplass, who made the Sundance entries "The Puffy Chair" and "Baghead" with his brother Jay, has an agreeable screen presence and also plays well opposite Delmore, while Leonard, who first appeared in "The Blair Witch Project" and sometimes evokes a wayward Owen Wilson, would be a perfect candidate for an imaginary Coen brothers sequel called "Son of the Dude."

Funny as it is, Brüno  could not be as shockingly uproarious as Borat . No matter how well retold, a joke necessarily loses explosive force the second time around. But a great gag is a thing of beauty forever—so, too, a comic performance. As the primitive Asiatic "other" Borat (at once crypto Jew and rabid anti-Semite), Baron Cohen articulated a violent antipathy, inciting the unwary to agree with him. As the sophisticated, though stupid, European "other" Brüno (at once narcissistic celeb and frantic wannabe), Baron Cohen courts that antipathy himself. In both cases, he confounds his audience, creating a persona we hate to love.
Humpday  opens with a pair of breeders in bed. (Everything they do is camp. ) A youngish married couple, Ben (mumblecordeon Mark Duplass ) and Anna (Alycia Delmore ), confess that they're too tired to procreate that night and then confess their mutual relief. As if in response, the doorbell rings at 2 a.m. and Ben's long-lost college buddy, Andrew (Blair Witch Project  survivor Joshua Leonard ), stumbles in from deepest Mexico. Anna, who has never had the pleasure, watches the unexpected bromantic action with grim incredulity. Aggressively loud, demonstrative, and hairy, Andrew is not quite Sacha Baron Cohen, but he seems a credible representation of Ben's id.
Reuniting an uptight married man with a footloose old pal, Lynn Shelton's third feature offers a (much) more extreme version of Kelly Reichardt 's Old Joy , also a sort of buddy movie, also shot in Seattle. In this case, the lost weekend is steeped in sexual anxiety. Friday night, Ben has to retrieve merry Andrew from a house called "Dionysus"—home to a bi cutie (the director herself) and an omnisexual assortment of roisterers. No orgies, but plenty of stoned dancing. Anna, who has prepared her signature pork chop dinner, sits home alone. She stews; Ben gets stewed. (Everything they do . . . ) Prompted by news of an amateur porn festival—sponsored by a local alt-weekly—Ben finds himself proposing to co-star with show-off Andrew in a mad art project, dude-on-dude action, totally straight, yet somewhere "beyond gay." Maybe they'll be famous. The only problem: Just who is going to bone whom?
Having thus invested its protagonists in a game of "chicken," played to justify their respective life choices, Humpday  delivers some excellent situation comedy. Mutatis mutandis, the scene where Andrew and Anna have a get-acquainted drink and Andrew inadvertently exposes Ben's boastful lie that his wife has signed off on their "project" is pure Honeymooners . (Bang, zoom, straight to the moon!)  Ben can't tell Anna why he wants to have sex with Andrew, only that it's very, very important to him. And, terrified that Ben might think he really did have a yen, Andrew can only sigh, "I wish I was more gay." Of course. Just as Brüno  is more of a comment on celebrity culture than the love (or hate) that dare not speak its name, Humpday  is actually less a queer comedy than a satiric view of macho. Appreciative as Shelton may be of her dudes, she has another agenda. Each in his own way, the guys have been freaked by a manifestation of assertive female sexuality—although the term "pussy-whipped" is never used.
Utterly functional, Humpday  is a movie of close camera placement and seemingly improvised dialogue. Everything is "awesome" unless it's "weird"—which is how it feels when the dudes meet for their tryst, set up the camera, and strip to their boxers. "We need to let our bodies take over," one hazards. With everything building up to the spectacle of two (straight) guys getting it on, Humpday  is ultimately about itself. Shelton claims that she contrived an open ending. What happens? Don't ask, I won't tell. Suffice it to say that, last seen beating their midriffs like apes, Ben and Andrew confront the fear but not the desire.
jhoberman@villagevoice.com
