
Turning personal obsession into deadpan comedy may seem like a description of Woody Allen's work, but Caveh Zahedi, the actor-director-subject of  "I Am a Sex Addict," creates his own sub-genre of screen narcissism. Present film tracing his relationship problems hits its stride from the opening scenes and continues hilariously for a while, before declining into more of same. Its undeniable appeal lies in shocking frankness shackled to irony, a combo that should attract indie lovers with psychoanalytic leanings and droll senses of humor. With clever marketing, the effort could catch on in limited release abroad.
Viewers may be excused for confounding Zahedi the filmmaker with Caveh the character around whom the film revolves. The director ("A Little Stiff," "I Don't Hate Las Vegas Anymore"), has stated the film is entirely autobiographical, and to prove it, he inserts videos of his real exes, played by actresses in the film. Staged as an on-camera confessional, it is framed by Caveh as a 45-year-old about to get married for the third time. As he reviews his past mistakes with women, he blames himself for only one thing: his obsession with sex. In reality, one suspects his problems go quite a bit further. An absurd confusion of ideas tumbles out in the film's dizzy storyline and jumpy style, but that's just where the fun lies.
Back in his hippie twenties, Caveh gives up his childhood sweetheart (still the love of his life) to marry a French beauty in need of a green card. Their relationship actually seems to be working out, until they move to Paris and he is knocked senseless by the streetwalkers. Caveh being a feminist and all, he insists on telling his wife, who foolishly sets oral sex as the limit she will tolerate. When he goes beyond it, they're through.
Film retells practically the same story with a nice girlfriend he finds at UCLA film school. Unable to kick his lust for hookers (now the L.A. car-sex variety), he loses g.f., too, before finally finding his ideal woman: the alcoholic, live-and-let-live Christa. She seems not to care about his prostitute fantasies -- and even encourages him -- but his habits take their toll, and when he spends the night away from their hotel at the Pesaro Film Festival, it's over. According to Caveh, he is finally cured when he begins attending regular meetings of Sex Addicts Anonymous, leading to his third marriage and pic's happy ending. 
Self-deprecating and self-justifying, Zahedi projects himself as a kind of naive, mischievous elf overwhelmed by female charms, somewhat like the Roberto Benigni persona. It's not necessary to identify with him to enjoy his antics. Despite pic's apparent frivolity, some hard work and clever choices have gone into the pop, staccato filming and editing, slyly underlined by Hilary Soldati's music. Zahedi and cameraman/co-producer Greg Watkins show they know how to make a virtue of shoestring necessity, for instance, substituting California alleyways for Paris
Camera (color), Watkins; editor, Logoreci, Zahedi; music, Hilary Soldati; animation, Bob Sabiston. Reviewed at Rotterdam Film Festival (World Cinema), Jan. 27, 2005. Running time: 90 MIN.
 


Caveh Zahedi's one-of-a-kind movie—a funny, inventive, ground-shifting hybrid of essay film, mea culpa, and pathological real-life romantic farce—aims for truth by wrecking its own verisimilitude. A micro-epic autobiography of broken relationships and sexual hang-ups, encapsulating 20 years of the filmmaker's life, I Am a Sex Addict kids not only its no-budget resources, but the oddity of reconstructing personal experience in cinematic terms.
By juxtaposing the admittedly fake, though, with the appallingly intimate, the writer-director-star sabotages the idea that dramatic re-creation is more accurate if it pretends to be real. Since his first completed feature, A Little Stiff  (1991), the San Francisco filmmaker has smudged the lines between documentary and fiction, incorporating family, friends, and above all an obsessive, neurotic cinephile named Caveh Zahedi into his seriocomic constructs.
Even in Richard Linklater 's Waking Life , Zahedi played himself: a gabby, spiritually yearning philosophe  mulling André Bazin 's concept of the "holy moment." That idea is central to Zahedi's films: When movies record moments of unmitigated life—an action captured in a single shot, or an actor merging somehow with his offscreen self—they're catching a glimpse of something created by God.
Granted, that's a strong claim for a movie called I Am a Sex Addict , in which the hero ducks into confessional booths to whack off and compulsively gets himself sucked off until he looks like he's going to yodel. Facing the camera in a tux, outside the hall where he's getting married, Zahedi chooses to spill his guts about the erotic fixations that totaled his previous marriages. In interviews, he has said this much is true: He nursed a fixation with prostitutes and underwent sex- addiction counseling to help overcome it.
If I Am a Sex Addict  had been played as straight melodrama, its sexual politics would have been risible. Spiraling from surreptitious dirty talk to rape fantasies and thwarted rough sex, Zahedi bravely lays open his libido; a macho poseur would have seen the role as a braggart's holiday. Zahedi, on the other hand, toddles toward a prostitute's rape-me beckoning like a dutiful child and widens his face in a half-dozen of the funniest, least vain male orgasms in movie history—the faces our wives and girlfriends thoughtfully try to ignore. At the height of passion, you expect him to bust into "The Sound of Music."
But the movie's guiding musical spirit is Jonathan Richman , whose impish, open-hearted love ballad sends Zahedi down the aisle with his new bride in the last scene. "We walk around like there are some holy moments, and there are all the other moments that are unholy," Zahedi wondered in Waking Life , considering the beauty that flickers even in ennui. "But this moment is holy, right?" Even better than a blowjob.
