
You can't blame John Cusack for jumping at the chance to play Igor.
By any name (including Fritz and Riff Raff), the mad scientist's assistant is one of the great movie scene-stealers of all time. He was showbiz gold even before Marty Feldman killed audiences with his comic genius as "Eye-gor" in "Young Frankenstein."
So if you're Cusack, and you know you're far too cute to ever play Igor in the flesh, it's not hard to see why you'd lend your voice to an animated film that puts the hunchbacked servant front and center. It's just hard to see why the film isn't better.
"Igor" is directed by Tony Leondis ("Lilo & Stitch 2") and written by Chris McKenna (TV's "American Dad"). It's rated PG, so presumably it's not going after the littlest horror fans anyway, but if any should wander in with their parents, they'll probably be more bored than scared.
This is a movie that, much like the monster it creates, has no idea what it was meant to be.
"Igor" isn't dark or twisted or sharp-witted enough to excite horror fans looking for inspired parody (except for the fantastically wacky final act, but more on that later), and it's also not cuddly/amusing enough to be embraced by the "Shrek" crowd. The film's muted landscapes lend some intrigue, but its characters, artfully drawn as they are, seem like an odd combination of Tim Burton castoffs, Venetian party masks, Wii-friendly game pieces (in stores now), and, in the case of the monster, somebody's warped idea of Raggedy Ann meets Delta Burke.
To convince you that it's full of surprises, the movie throws in Louis Prima songs where they don't belong, and it riffs on classic monster-movie cliches (blind orphans, busty maidens, "yesss, mahster" moments . . .) mostly by spinning them into newly unfunny cliches.
The familiar story gets a few mildly interesting tweaks: In the kingdom of Malaria, as in Terry Pratchett novels, Igor is the generic name for lab lackey. Cusack plays a baby-faced Igor who unconvincingly longs for his own chance to invent evil. Unfortunately, the monster that Igor accidentally commands has the voice of Molly Shannon and more interest in musical theater than in evil-doing. Saddled with this softy, how will Igor triumph over sinister Dr. Schadenfreude (Eddie Izzard) and his equally sinister girlfriend (Jennifer Coolidge) to win the Evil Science Fair? He gets bumbling help from a mangled, suicidal rabbit (Steve Buscemi) and the obligatory dimwitted brain in a jar (this time given wheels and the voice of Sean Hayes).
None of that story lives up to its spoof potential, though it does lead to a superbly demented finale that has the monster going berserk during a production of "Annie." The movie finally comes alive in that moment. If only somebody had flipped the switch sooner.


Set in a steampunk fantasy world that owes as much to Tim Burton and the Quay Brothers as to James Whale's Frankenstein  (1931), this cheeky CG fable tells the story of a hunchbacked lab assistant (voiced by Cusack) whose dream of mad-scientist stardom hits a snag when his monstrous creation (Shannon) turns out to be a big softie who prefers show tunes to screams of terror. The visuals are a kick; the groan-inducing dialogue isn't. Igor  tries to spoof Mary Shelley just as Shrek  did the Brothers Grimm, but something tells us this movie's charmless hero won't make an ogre-size impression on kid audiences. Call it a hunch.

 In the Kingdom of Malaria, inky clouds obscure the sun and loony scientists are rewarded for diabolical inventions. There’s scant reward, though, for sitting through “Igor,” an animated twist on the Frankenstein story that never sparks to life.  Combining genetics, Aldous Huxley and horror-movie history, the film’s scientists have engineered a servile class of hunchbacks, all named Igor. When one of these sorry creatures (voiced by John Cusack) succeeds in assembling a female monster — part Betty Boop, part Elephant Man — first place at the Evil Science Fair seems assured. If only she weren’t so gosh-darned nice.  As our Igor lurches toward love and a realignment of priorities, his progress is impeded by a Liberace-styled nemesis (Eddie Izzard, camping it up), a suicidal bunny (Steve Buscemi) and a dimwitted, jar-dwelling brain (Sean Hayes). Kiddies, however, will be undiverted by the humdrum animation and a palette that mirrors the film’s moral and meteorological gloom. Neither will they respond to a script (by Chris McKenna) that seems more focused on tickling movie-savvy adults: how many kindergartners recognize James Lipton?  Despite a soundtrack bobbing with the bawdy sentiments of Louis Prima, “Igor” leaves us unmoved by its vertically challenged hero. His belief that the ultimate evil is an excerpt from “Annie,” on the other hand, deserves our unqualified sympathy.  “Igor” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Characters wear boots made from baby seals and display a poster of tortured kittens.

Vaguely resembling a Tim Burton toon, minus the magic, "Igor" is a mirthless animated romp set in the world of mad scientists and the woefully misunderstood hunchbacks who assist them. With its belabored gags, misfired pop-culture references and garish visuals crammed together like so many disjointed body parts, this manic kidpic cranks up the annoy-o-meter early on and rarely lets up. An appealingly kooky premise and name vocal talent could lure some families into MGM's B.O. lair, but, like a brain in a jar, this one belongs on the shelf. 
The kingdom of Malaria is a land of permanent storm and shadow, populated by evil geniuses who are aided in their diabolical experiments by drooling, lumbering, uniformly misshapen servants known as Igors. The Igor who narrates "Igor," however, is different from his accursed ilk -- for one, he's voiced by John Cusack, and thus has the rare gift of articulate speech, as well as a talent for invention that goes unnoticed by the cruel Dr. Glickenstein (John Cleese).
When his master perishes in a lab accident, Igor spies an opportunity to invent his own monster -- a femme Frankenstein capable of destroying anything in her path -- and compete in Malaria's annual evil science fair. Much to his dismay, his creation, Eva (the joke was fresher in "Wall-E"), turns out to be a sweet, sensitive creature who's mildly insecure about her enormous size and has dreams of one day becoming a famous actress. Cue weirdly incongruous quips (Eva keeps a "sense-memory journal") and campy allusions to Norma Desmond and "Annie."
Though it reps the bigscreen debut of helmer Tony Leondis, working from a first-produced screenplay by Chris McKenna, "Igor" feels of a piece with other overly chatty 3-D toons, as scene after scene is deflated by hyperactive bits of business and strenuously unfunny banter -- the cumulative effect of which approximates that of a power drill to the noggin. Characters' obnoxious patter seems unlikely to engage viewers, young or old, at any meaningful level.
While most of the performances fall in the same overbearing register, Steve Buscemi puts his cynical, shysterish tones to good use as a rabbit with a demented death wish; Jennifer Coolidge supplies welcome comic distraction with an unplaceable accent that should stir affectionate memories of "A Mighty Wind"; and Molly Shannon conveys flickers of feeling as the big, and big-hearted, Eva. Latter serves as the delivery mechanism for pic's moppet-scaled messages about inner beauty, the importance of pursuing your passions and why being good is, y'know, better than being evil.
Burton's "Corpse Bride" and "The Nightmare Before Christmas" used dazzling stop-motion techniques to bring their horror-movie landscapes to life. By contrast, the gaudy, CG-rendered world of "Igor" (courtesy of Paris-based Sparx Animation Studios) looks underimagined and over-stylized, with inconsistent character designs and an excess of glaring red in the pic's color palette. Igor has the ability to create life; too bad he can't reanimate his movie.
