 “I don’t believe in chance, I believe in the will of God.” That credo, spoken in a dry, dispassionate voice, drops more than once from the mouth of Giulio Andreotti (Toni Servillo), the scandal-ridden seven-time Italian prime minister, in Paolo Sorrentino’s flamboyant biographical fantasy, “Il Divo.”  A label once applied to Julius Caesar, Il Divo is only one of several popular nicknames for Mr. Andreotti, who entered the Italian political arena in the late 1940s and is now 90. As the right-leaning leader of the country’s centrist Christian Democratic party, Mr. Andreotti, elected to his first term as prime minister in 1972, has been called the Sphinx, the Hunchback, the Black Pope and Beelzebub. He was appointed a senator for life in 1991.  In exploring Mr. Andreotti’s possible connections to a stream of political assassinations and to other killings made to look like suicides, which began in the late 1970s and continued into the early ’90s, “Il Divo” has the tone and style of a blood-soaked comic opera.  The most notorious crime to occur on Mr. Andreotti’s watch was the abduction of Aldo Moro, his left-leaning rival for prime minister, in March 1978 by members of the Red Brigade. Mr. Andreotti refused to negotiate with the kidnappers, and 54 days after the abduction, Moro’s bullet-riddled body was discovered in a car.  The density of violent crime in this speculative history of skulduggery in high places equals that of “I, Claudius,” “The Sopranos” and  the “Godfather” movies. In Mr. Servillo’s portrayal, Mr. Andreotti, the ultimate Teflon politician  —   he was sentenced to 24 years in prison in 2002 in connection with the assassination of a journalist but was eventually cleared of the charges—  suggests a Peter Sellers parody of Henry Kissinger with the deadeyed gaze of Peter Bogdanovich.  Poker-faced, blinking behind thick, tortoiseshell glasses, the distant traces of a smirk playing on his lips, Mr. Andreotti sidles through the corridors of power like a shy undertaker, his shoulders hunched, his elbows clamped to his sides, a security detail trailing him like a funeral cortege.  “Il Divo” unfolds as a series of solo and choral set pieces that culminate  in two arias. In the first, a journalist interviewing Mr. Andreotti lays out the presumed crimes and calls him either the most cunning criminal in the country who never got caught or the most persecuted man in the history of Italy.  In the second, Mr. Andreotti imagines   confessing his guilt to his wife, Livia (Anna Bonaiuto);  it is the only moment  when his composure cracks.  Although “Il Divo” is a blanket indictment, it goes to great lengths to understand what drove Mr. Andreotti to commit his supposed crimes and even follows him into a confessional where he admits his regret over Moro’s death.  The film, which won the Jury Prize at last year’s Cannes festival, has an uphill battle in American theaters. Most of its real-life characters are unknown outside Italy, and the complicated, shadowy relationships among politicians, the Mafia and the Vatican are difficult to decipher.  But the filmmaking is sensational. From its bizarre opening image of the migraine-prone Mr. Andreotti with acupuncture needles stuck in his head  — a picture of prime minister as human porcupine that could be out of a Fellini film —  “Il Divo” is a tour de force of indelibly flashy imagery. The story begins with a spectacular montage of assassinations from the late 1970s to the early ’90s; then, one by one, the sinister, loyal-unto-death members of Mr. Andreotti’s Christian Democratic faction are introduced.  The movie repeatedly and gleefully quotes from  the “Godfather” trilogy, especially Part 3. Although it dips back in time, it concentrates on Mr. Andreotti’s later years and ends with his 1999 trial for associating with the Mafia. One of several brilliant set pieces shows the 1992 assassination of Salvo Lima (Giorgio Colangeli), Mr. Andreotti’s Sicilian connection, in a scene that intercuts shots of Mr. Andreotti at the race track with the hit man on a motorcycle pursuing his prey.  Almost every shot in the film is a grand composition, with heavy chiaroscuro and emotionally stirring music (a compendium of Sibelius, Fauré, Vivaldi and Saint-Saëns, along with Beth Orton, Teho Teardo and Trio’s “Da Da Da”). As operatic cinema, it ranks alongside the best of Martin Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola.  In the movie’s climactic confession, Mr. Andreotti’s dispassionate facade slowly dissolves, and his voice rises as he uses the image of his wife’s innocent eyes to describe his self-justifying, megalomaniacal political philosophy. Those eyes, he says, “have no idea of the deeds that power must commit to ensure the well-being and development of the country,”  as he takes “direct and indirect responsibility” for 236 deaths between 1969 and 1984.  All this carnage is justified with an imperious declaration: “We cannot allow the end of the world in the name of what is right. We have a task, a divine task. We must love God greatly to understand how necessary evil is for good. God knows it, and I know it too.

An intensely political film so wildly inventive and witty that it will become a touchstone for years to come, "Il Divo" is a masterpiece for maverick helmer-scribe Paolo Sorrentino. Not merely chronicling the career of seven-time Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti but also zooming in on the enigmatic politico's character, pic features an astonishing degree of craftsmanship and a towering performance by Toni Servillo. Sole drawback is that nonlocals will feel inundated by names, most of which are familiar only to Italo auds. This is a brave, bold film whose chances of international success are relatively small, but whose ramifications are huge.
First entering government in 1947, Andreotti -- currently sitting as a life senator -- and his Christian Democrat party basically ruled Italy as a one-party system for 44 years, until the "Tangentopoli," or Bribesville, scandals finally toppled the party's hold.
Since the early 1990s, Andreotti has been implicated in a wide variety of illegal activities, including Mafia connections, but he's managed to be acquitted of all charges. In "Il Divo," Sorrentino turns expert hunting dog, convincingly laying scandals of the past 40 years at Andreotti's feet.
That he does so with a bewitching combination of humor and bravado only increases his punch, sure to send Italian viewers out of the cinemas feeling battered by the scope of implications generally known but often pushed away as inconvenient truths.
Pic's triumph, however, isn't simply the issues raised, but also the way Sorrentino plumbs the sphinx-like depths of Andreotti's personality with a delightfully piquant originality that, paired with lensing evoking Sokurov and Scorsese, is little short of breathtaking.
The first glimpse of the man himself, sometimes nicknamed "Beelzebub," is with acupuncture needles sticking out of his face in an effort to cure his migraine. Thanks in part to Vittorio Sodano's superb makeup -- down-turned ears, fleshy face resembling pallid elephant skin -- but largely Servillo's own genius, his impenetrable features resemble a mixture of Boris Karloff with Buster Keaton, as if a mordant Charles Addams character came to life and took control of the world.
Opening moments knock your socks off as a driving rock number accompanies a montage of assassinations, the victims identified with cleverly designed three-dimensional captions forming a who's who of murdered politicians, bankers and judiciary, including Aldo Moro, Roberto Calvi and Giovanni Falcone -- all guaranteed to put a lump in the throats of Italian auds.
A quick cut to Andreotti, head turned into a blank cartoon bubble thanks to the expert placement of a light fixture, reveals Sorrentino's genius here for wedding playfulness to genuine meaning.
"Il Divo" largely focuses on Andreotti's seventh government and fallout over Mafia connection allegations. It was toward the end of this final tenure as prime minister that his deeply corrupt ally Salvo Lima (Giorgio Colangeli) was murdered by the Mafia, the assassination here intercut with scenes of Andreotti at the races.
Later on, following a montage of politicians who killed themselves in the wake of the "Tangentopoli" scandal, an impassive Andreotti is interviewed by a journalist who recites an almost biblical litany of unsavory events linked to the "Divo Giulio," as he's known.
Though it may sound as if Sorrentino pitches everything with overflowing speed, he's calibrated his scenes beautifully, accumulating force for the two sequences that form pic's heart of darkness. When Mafia turncoats point accusatory fingers at Andreotti, he has to break the news to wife Livia (Anna Bonaiuto), who tells him lovingly that one can't live with someone for decades and not know who they are deep down. As they hold hands and watch television, Livia silently realizes she, like everyone else, doesn't know her husband at all; the look of fear and confusion on Bonaiuto's face is devastating.
Sorrentino follows this with Andreotti's confession, told frontally as he sits in a chair while wearing his usual expressionless, even-tempered demeanor. As his explanations build, his voice rises in volume, and for the first time Servillo reveals the demon beneath the mask of passivity: It's like gazing into the face of evil stripped bare.
Sorrentino's reputation as an actor's director was always clear, but here in his third outing with Servillo ("One Man Up," "The Consequences of Love"), he's reached an alchemical bond with his star. A stooped solitary figure moving through space as if in a vacuum, his head tilted slightly down to push up the roll of fat under his chin, he shuffles or scurries like an insect, not from nervousness but an absolute confidence in where he's going. Servillo's facial immobility works as a clearly calculated wall, expertly serving his need to portray the impenetrability that's kept Andreotti in power for 60 years.
Astonishingly for a helmer whose trademark was a frigid dispassion, Sorrentino displays a delicious sense of humor in both script and lensing. He's still drawn to an airless quality, but he uses it now in a way that feels completely new and witty, returning Andreotti's ironic outlook with his own pointed critique.
Together with usual ace d.p. Luca Bigazzi and brilliant editor Cristiano Travaglioli, Sorrentino's crafted a unique look custom-tailored to his subject, with a camera whose elegant movements create a stunning emotional force.
Though always finely tuned to the uses of music and sound, here again Sorrentino out-does himself, weaving Sibelius compositions with singers like Beth Orton and pairing them to scenes in a way that extracts maximum emotion without feeling manipulative. Final images tied to Trio's deadpan 1982 hit "Da Da Da" couldn't be more perfect.
Camera (color), Luca Bigazzi; editor, Cristiano Travaglioli; music, Teho Teardo; production designer, Lino Fiorito; costume designer, Daniela Ciancio; make-up, effects, Vittorio Sodano; sound (Dolby Digital), Emanuele Cecere, Silvia Moraes, Angelo Raguseo; associate producers, Stefano Bonfanti, Gianluigi Gardani; assistant director, Davide Bertoni; casting, Annamaria Sambucco. Reviewed at Cannes Film Festival (competing), May 22, 2008. Running time: 117 MIN.
 

With:
 Alberto Cracco, Piera Degli Esposti, Lorenzo Gioielli, Paolo Graziosi, Gianfelice Imparato, Massimo Popolizio, Aldo Ralli, Giovanni Vettorazzo, Fanny Ardant, Enzo Rai.
(Italian dialogue)
 



Hard on the heels of the acclaimed Gomorrah  , Italian corruption gets a much quieter but equally vigorous workout in Paolo Sorrentino 's highly stylized portrait of the country's most enduring political leader, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti . Teflon  doesn't begin to describe the Christian Democrat who led one after another of Italy's rapid succession of administrations and survived a major bribery and corruption investigation, while opponents and former allies mysteriously dropped dead around him. Il Divo   plays like an elegantly ritualized black comedy, with Sorrentino deploying every formal tool in his arsenal to disrupt facile interpretations of Andreotti's strategically opaque character. Toni Servillo  plays Andreotti with brilliant restraint as a physically disconnected man whose curling ears and still, round-shouldered gait hilariously—and pathetically—recall the desiccated food critic Anton Ego  from Ratatouille . We learn that Andreotti was a cultured wit, with a gift—like this movie—for aphoristic quotation; that he suffered from debilitating headaches; that, in his way, he loved his wife, who loved him back in hers. His solitary nocturnal strolls, surrounded by burly blokes with machine guns, offer one of the movie's few clues to the price he paid for his obsessive lockhold on power. Aside from an imaginary "confession" in which he grows momentarily unhinged, Andreotti remains a properly unknowable monument on his country's shadowy, shady political landscape.
