         Imagine that you've stayed up late watching a triple bill of Federico Fellini's "8 1/2 ," Woody Allen's "Stardust Memories" and David Lynch's "Mulholland Drive," scarfed down too much Thai takeout and had a fight with your significant other. Going to bed in this condition, you might have a dream that resembles Adam Goldberg's tragicomedy, "I Love Your Work."
 
  The film itself is a dream inside a dream, with filmmaking and voyeurism taking over the lives of the characters and Goldberg constantly bending reality back on itself. In nearly every scene, life is being recorded and reordered by answering machines, cellphones, cameras and that most devilish device of all, memory.
 


         






    Giovanni Ribisi stars as Gray Evans, a hipster movie star married to blond bombshell Mia Lang (Franka Potente) in one of those star-crossed relationships that plays out in the tabloids and the weeklies as much as it does in reality.
 
  They live in the blinding light of paparazzo-ridden premieres and crowded, noisy after-parties when not making movies or rambling about in their stark, downtown L.A. loft.
 
  Obsessive, delusional and paranoid, Gray hires a security guru, Yehud (Jared Harris), to investigate the possibility that someone is stalking him. Gray photographs and dreams (or are the photographs actually dreams?) about a young woman named Shana (Christina Ricci), with whom he appears to have had a relationship in his pre-star past.
 
  He also becomes increasingly preoccupied with an aspiring young filmmaker, John (Joshua Jackson), who works in a video store, and his beguiling conceptual artist girlfriend, Jane (Marisa Coughlan).
 
  Once Yehud assures the mistrustful Gray they are harmless, Gray pursues a friendship with them. He flatters John with his interest but is obviously more drawn to Jane, who slightly resembles Shana.
 
  Considering its obvious influences, which might have resulted in a hodgepodge of styles, and the self-indulgence of the protagonist, the film probably shouldn't work as well as it does. Goldberg's love of film plays to the advantage of "I Love Your Work," because even as he heaps on the film references and homages, they are all directly related to the story he's trying to tell. As with a lot of actors turned filmmakers (this is his second feature after 1998's "Scotch and Milk"), Goldberg is able to gather a talented cast, which also includes Jason Lee, Vince Vaughn, Judy Greer and Nicky Katt in smaller roles.
 
  Though Goldberg displays a fascination with the dysfunctional aspects of celebrity and the symbiotic relationship between stars and their fans, the film also works as an allegory for the turbulence of contemporary life. He also displays a real affinity for shooting Los Angeles, especially downtown, showing its 21st century decadence through architecture that is both beautiful and neglected, a condition the current loft boom is quickly pushing aside. The filmmaker also collaborated with the Flaming Lips' Steven Drozd in creating an effectively moody soundscape.
 
  A highly stylized dissertation on the foibles of fame and our inability to secure happiness in our present condition, "I Love Your Work" has its rewards for those up to the challenge of tackling its nonlinear structure and brooding nature.
 
  *
 
 'I Love Your Work'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, sexuality, some drug content and violent images
 
 Times guidelines:
 One intensely violent scene
 
  A ThinkFilm release. Director Adam Goldberg. Producers Chris Hanley, David Hillary. Screenplay by Adrian Butchart, Adam Goldberg. Director of photography Mark Putnam. Editors Zack Bell, John Valerio. Music Adam Goldberg, Steven Drozd. Production design Erin Smith. Costume design Dawn Weisberg. Running time: 1 hour, 51 minutes.
 
  At Regent Showcase, 614 N. La Brea Ave., L.A. (323) 934-2944   


What did the 24 individuals who have the word "producer" attached to their names on "I Love Your Work" actually do? Did the consulting producers consult with the other producers or only with one another? Were the associate producers, as Billy Wilder once remarked, the only ones willing to associate with the producers? Are there now two dozen people running around Hollywood claiming they produced a hot film festival entry starring Giovanni Ribisi and Christina Ricci? All these questions, if not the answers, are more intriguing than most of what happens onscreen in this wallow in Hollywood hipster self-absorption. Name talent may attract some distrib nibbles, but interest among paying audiences will be scant.
Like thesp Adam Goldberg's first feature, "Scotch and Milk" (1998), "I Love Your Work" is populated by self-consciously cool scenesters who make it a point to live the loft life in old downtown Los Angeles. Although more structured and thematically focused than its predecessor, new effort can still see no further than its own nose, so thoroughly preoccupied is it with the peculiar and highly insular problems of its paranoid putative protag.
Gray Evans (Ribisi) and Mia Lang (Franka Potente) are a hot young acting couple whose marriage is already heading south after just a year. They make glamorous entrances at openings, get wasted behind VIP ropes at parties where they can hang with Elvis Costello (for real) and sit around reading their fan mail, all things guaranteed to generate quick viewer sympathy and identification.
But the true measure of Gray's intense narcissism is his conviction that he's being celebrity stalked. Now, this could all be a fantasy, as could a film he may or may not have made on the subject. But his fixation is enormous enough that, not only does he imagine his own death, but he himself begins stalking, after a fashion, a videostore clerk (Joshua Jackson) whose wife (Marisa Coughlan) and life he sees as far happier than his own. Gray also fantasizes about a conventional life with a nice former g.f. (Ricci).
There's no doubt that Goldberg and co-writer Adrian Butchart have the attitudes, mores and talk of their young showbiz subjects down pat, and pic does offer an amusing inside look at the unique pressures on a marquee marriage when a couple's every move is being scrutinized by an often sensationalistic media. By far the film's most successful sequence has Gray, who is convinced of Mia's infidelity, talking his wife into cooperating with a fawning magazine profile and photo shoot designed to offset rampant rumors of trouble, only to see the high-strung Mia go off in the interviewer's presence.
But whatever modest interest and credibility is built up in the first hour is thoroughly squandered in the second, which has Gray become completely overwhelmed by what an excerpted TV show conveniently identifies as a narcissistic personality disorder. Pic pulls off a complete self-immolation as it pursues Gray's obsessions to the bitter, and far too tragic, end.
Outcome could perhaps have been tolerable if Goldberg had any sense of humor or perspective about what ails the young and rich and famous, but helmer presents his central character as the victim of some rarified illness that, unfortunately, comes with the territory; if your face suddenly becomes recognizable to the public, he seems to suggest, you lose your immunity.
Lead role plays right into Ribisi's predilection for looking pale and affected by too many unhealthy substances; he must also be the only happening young thesp in Hollywood today who doesn't work out. Potente bestows the quicksilver Mia with credible instability and unreliability, and entire supporting cast is convincing in roles that can hardly have represented creative stretches. Widescreen production is well outfitted technically.
