The positively untrue story of a bride who falls in love with a woman while walking down the aisle becomes, in this age of The L Word , merely a charming utopian sexual complication in Imagine Me & You . Pretty Rachel (Piper Perabo, inhabiting the Gwyneth Paltrow neighborhood of British accents) is happy enough with her handsome groom, Heck (Match Point 's Matthew Goode). It's wedding florist Luce (Lena Headey), however, who catches Rachel's eye, one mascaraed soul mate finding another in fairy-tale fashion. Not that there's anything wrong with that 혰 but neither is there any real proof of life-changing Ms.-on-Ms. Rightness provided by first-time British writer-director Ol Parker.
Actually, Love Actually 's style DNA exerts far more influence on the chemistry of this blithely synthetic romantic comedy than meaningful sexual identity. Every supporting character, including Luce's depressed mum, Rachel's squabbling parents, and Heck's horndog best pal, is introduced for color rather than consequence. Congratulations are in order for Rachel's sexual awakening, but we might as well applaud the dull girl for falling in love with the nearest bunch of lilies rather than the florist.

 For those in the mood for a story about same-sex lovers up against the odds, their histories and the world around them, may I suggest an evening on Brokeback Mountain. And for those searching for a distaff variation on the same general idea while scanning the shelves of their local video store, where the enervating trifle "Imagine Me & You" will soon be gathering dust, may I instead suggest a night in with "M채dchen in Uniform," "Go Fish," "The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love" or even that disreputable classic of vampire fangs and gauze, "The Hunger."  Written and directed by Ol Parker, a British screenwriter making his lackluster directorial debut, "Imagine Me & You" tells the story of Rachel (Piper Perabo), who's fast-tracking down the straight and narrow when the florist-next-door, Luce (Lena Headey), unintentionally throws up a roadblock. The women meet cute at Rachel's wedding, during which the bride exchanges vows with her longtime beau, Heck (Matthew Goode, angling to become the new Hugh Grant), shortly after swapping long looks with Luce, who's provided the flowers for the ceremony along with the story's jumping-off point. Mr. Parker's aspirations to the light tone and touch of Richard Curtis, the screenwriter and sometimes director of romantic comedies like "Love Actually," are thwarted by a pronounced absence of cinematic imagination.  One thing leads very slowly to another as Rachel tries to come to terms with her attraction to Luce, and her newfound object of desire tries not to muck up a young marriage. En route to the obvious clinch there are long walks, awkward pauses, family dysfunction and fireworks, though not from the visibly uncomfortable leads, and coy bits of business with the supporting cast. Ms. Perabo, who starred in the howler "Coyote Ugly" a few years back and is currently appearing in "Cheaper by the Dozen 2," manages a credible British accent, if not the requisite feeling, while the fetching Ms. Headey tries her hardest to appear interested in  her costar and the material. In this she has only intermittent success.  "Imagine Me & You" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian), mainly for adult language.

Imagine Me and You" reps a slick but slight Brit pic, chockfull with tart one-liners and pretty posh people, with one major twist: The romantic leads are both women. Script by debuting helmer Ol Parker (who wrote BBC drama "Loved Up") cribs heavily but fairly competently from the Richard Curtis romcom handbook, from its opening wedding scene to its public declaration of love finale. However, the mainstream auds who would respond best to pic's fluffy aesthetic might balk at its Sapphic storyline, while gay and lesbian viewers will find girl-on-girl action here far too tame. Imagine midrange-to-low B.O.
Set mostly in London's Primrose Hill neighborhood, "Imagine" opens with blushing bride Rachel (Piper Perabo, assaying a fair English accent) about to wed her longtime sweetheart Heck (Matthew Goode). She makes it to the church on time, but on the way up the aisle locks eyes with Luce (Lena Headey), the florist Rachel's mother Tessa (Celia Imrie) hired, whom Rachel has never met before. The attraction is instantaneous, but the wedding and reception go ahead as planned.
Script has to stretch to get the two women together in order to let the romance blossom. Seeing that Heck's rakish best man Coop (Darren Boyd) has taken a shine to Luce, Rachel invites both to a dinner where Luce unabashedly reveals she's a lesbian. (Believably, the information only makes Coop pursue her more.) 
A chance encounter in a supermarket and Luce's unlikely new friendship with Rachel's little sister H (Boo Jaclyn) throw the women in each other's company until neither can deny the mutual attraction. Even so, they take their sweet time revealing true feelings to each other. They finally crack and lock lips in the backroom of Luce's upmarket flower shop, but the love play remains chastely PG-rated. 
Heck, however, senses something's amiss when his new missus goes off sex, and confides his worries obliquely to Coop. The men's barroom banter reps the truest ringing dialogue in the film, their friendship convincing in a way that Luce and Rachel's relationship never is. Femme auds may begin to suspect that Parker's knowledge of lesbians is mostly theoretical.
A steady stream of well-turned quips nevertheless manages to hold interest. Meanwhile, the procession of walk-on characters that pass through Luce's shop add comic glints. 
Cast of capable but not outstanding British thesps in the supporting roles sparkle where they can, but the two comely, toothy female leads show limited range here, and never cook up convincing sexual chemistry. Goode acquits himself best with some of the film's sharpest lines, even though, on the strength of this and Woody Allen's "Match Point," he looks in danger of being forever typecast as the affable toff patsy. 
Tech package is sturdily assembled, but not flashy. Film's use of North London locations makes logical geographical sense to local residents, and shows off for foreigners some of the burg's prettiest upper-middle-class quarters and parkland.

British rom-coms live and die by the charm of their patter. And though this lesbian-themed entry in the Notting Hill   and Four Weddings and a Funeral  category neatly accomplishes the genre's other requirement, the ability to double as travelogue, its players are availed of precious little wit. The plot, which unfolds in dappled and dewy Primrose Hill, finds angelic Rachel (Piper Perabo ) questioning her "perfect" marriage to successful broker Heck (Matthew Goode , the British Mark Ruffalo ) after she locks desirous eyes with their hot wedding florist Luce (Lena Headey ). To move things along, Heck's cad pal (Darren Boyd ) falls for Luce, occasioning more social contact with Rachel. The redundant meet-cute is extended further by dull jags involving Rachel's precocious 8-year-old sister, her parents' strained marriage, and Luce's mother's dating issues. Posh bores all (what passes for humor are things like stuffy mum exclaiming, "sweet shit in a bucket!"), the characters simply run their tedious mouths until the two women finally consummate their flirtation with a tasteful smooch in the flower shop stockroom. These being moral times for celluloid gays, there is no consideration of an affair. It's got to be all or nothing.
Straining to adhere to treacly formula혰in which any personal fallout surrounding love's madness is milked for jokes then tidily resolved 혰the film creates a bizarro world where the only obstacles to the smooth transition from affluent hetero wifehood to affluent girl-girl bliss are a few stunned parental reactions that instantly melt into full-fledged support. Even mild-mannered Heck just basically says "heck." But then, what does he care? He's rich as folk. The goal here is to ensconce us in luxury as we imagine what our two foxes must be imagining doing to each other. But not only is there not enough panting to bunch any panties, this polite romp could use more of that other L-word: laughs. And it doesn't help that the final song, "Happy Together," to which the title alludes, only reminds anyone who saw Adaptation  of a movie that had lots of 'em.
