 Claire Denis's magnificent enigma of a film, "The Intruder," explores the troubled soul of Louis Trebor (Michel Subor), a brooding loner with a heart condition who lives with two large white dogs in a forest near the French-Swiss border. As this rugged, ailing 68-year-old outdoorsman travels halfway around the world to begin a new life, his past, present and future, real and imagined, blend into a visually spellbinding depiction of a selfish sensualist's quest for a longer life with a redemptive final chapter.  In an early scene, Louis, while swimming in a lake near his cabin one idyllic afternoon, suffers a mild heart attack, his dogs at his side. With the help of a mysterious Russian woman (Katia Golubeva) who stalks him for the remainder of the film like a guilty conscience and a portent of mortality, he buys a new heart on the black market with cash stashed in a Swiss bank account.  Then he travels  to South Korea, where he buys a boat and sails it to his former home, a dilapidated shack on a remote island south of Tahiti. His dream is to find the son he sired decades earlier when he lived there. But once he is settled, his body begins to reject the alien heart.  Ms. Denis, a fearless aesthetic adventurer who lived in Africa until she was 14, has always been fascinated by stories and images of cultural imposition, exile, alienation and the contemplation of the Other. She is also one of the world's most sensual filmmakers. Working with her brilliant cinematographer Agnès Godard, she spills onto the screen images of man  and  nature with an  attunement to light, shadow, color, texture and mood that approaches the surreal.  That sensuality is metaphysical as well as tactile. "The Intruder," like her 1999 masterpiece, "Beau Travail," a variation of "Billy Budd" re-imagined in Africa among a regiment of the French Foreign Legion, conveys a spiritual reverence for the beauty of the human form along with a visceral fascination with the animal essence beneath that radiant surface. Her notorious film "Trouble Every Day" went so far as to portray love as cannibalism, literally and metaphorically.  As Louis exchanges his sylvan paradise in the Jura Mountains for a tropical one in the South Seas, the movie's portrayal of the natural world is ravishing, but ominous in its recognition of a fierce natural order beyond mankind's  control. The most breathtaking image in this film of few words and many revelatory flashes is a long-held shot of cloud-draped mountains viewed from a boat plowing through the heaving gray water of the South Pacific. The shot is so permeated with awe, dread and mystery that you wish the camera would never turn away.  At the least, "The Intruder" is a rich travelogue in which Louis's journey from one hemisphere to another describes, in the words of Ms. Denis's director's statement, "a loop, the curve of Earth as I imagine it." But these images have a conceptual dimension. The movie, true to its title, is filled with images of intrusion, of physical and cultural boundaries being traversed. Once transplanted, Louis's new heart, which he insists must come from a young man, is an alien presence in his body. Hikers, hunters and drug smugglers intrude on his forest, in which  the pastoral atmosphere is punctuated by gunshots and dogs barking. The movie's most astounding image, plucked from Louis's unconscious, shows a human heart dropped into the snow and sniffed at by dogs.  Cold-eyed and determined with a streak of violence, Louis is himself emotionally heartless. His estranged son, Sidney (Grégoire Colin),  lives in a village near the cabin with his wife (Florence Loiret-Caille), a border guard, and two young children to whom he shows a tenderness that Louis never exhibits. Louis is also having an affair with the local pharmacist (Bambou) who brings him his heart medication, and he nurses an attraction to a beautiful, feral local dog breeder (Béatrice Dalle), dubbed Queen of the Northern Hemisphere, who doesn't return his interest and thinks he's crazy.  Once in the South Seas, Louis finds himself an intruder in a primitive, seafaring culture whose tribal council, informed that he is looking for his long-lost son, holds auditions for young men in the village to fill the role and receive the large inheritance Louis has promised. We even see the young Louis in a brief excerpt from Paul Gegauff's obscure 1965 film, "Le Reflux," in which Mr. Subor appeared.  One way to view a film that will frustrate those seeking crisp narrative structure and a linear story is to see "The Intruder" as a collagelike stream of allusive cinematic poetry assembled from various sources to evoke an idea. An acknowledged inspiration is "L'Intrus," a short memoir  by the French philosopher Jean-Luc Nancy about his heart transplant.  But Louis's futile search for a better paradise also evokes the literature and journals of Robert Louis Stevenson and Paul Gauguin, as well as F. W. Murnau's classic 1931 film "Tabu." The best way to enjoy "The Intruder" is to surrender to its poetry without demanding cut-and-dried explanations.  The score for "The Intruder," composed by Stuart Staples of the British group Tindersticks, is a repeated loop of clattering percussion, plucked guitar and wailing trumpet. This seductive musical fragment complements the movie's dream of a paradise that beckons and remains as elusive as a mirage.

A fresh life with a new heart provides the starting point for Claire Denis' dense meditation on beginning again in "The Intruder." More opaque than her past works and unlikely to garner her new fans, Denis gives near equal weight to reality, dreams, nightmares and premonitions, resisting a traditional narrative in order to question the possibilities of escape within the modern world. A beautiful, complex work that challenges viewers to mentally sift interior and exterior journeys, pic has little hope outside specialized niche auds and DVD, though that's unfortunate as d.p. Agnes Godard's gorgeous lensing will lose scope on the small screen. 
Denis' inspiration began with Jean-Luc Nancy's memoir of his heart transplant and what to do with a new lease on life; she then cast an eye on Robert Louis Stevenson's writings on the lure of the South Seas. She qualifies that siren call with a generous dose of Murnau's classic tragedy of Polynesia, "Tabu," in which an island paradise becomes irrevocably infected by modern life.
The intruder of the title, therefore, becomes more than just the new heart, as in Nancy's book: It does double duty as a description of the anti-hero in his chosen new world.
Returning to the Denis fold, Michel Subor plays Louis, a robust, mysterious loner living on the French-Swiss border. He displays the kind of tormented machismo that has long fascinated Denis, preferring his dogs to the occasional contact with his son (Gregoire Colin). Heart trouble forces him to leave his snow-covered wilderness to visit a bank vault in Geneva and withdraw enough cash to pay for a new heart on the black market.
Where the dough comes from is never explained. Following the operation he flies to Korea, where he discusses blueprints for a ship he wants built. He continues to Tahiti, where he searches for a son he fathered years before (shades of Marlon Brando) and moves into a hut just as heart trouble returns.
This basic skeleton is then fleshed out by deliberately subjective -- at times confusing -- visions blending past with future and hypothetical future. Words have always been of lesser importance to Denis, whose focus is on symbols and visual metaphors juxtaposed to maximize inner emotional conflict.
As an impressionistic director, she favors strong characters who exude complicated personalities without the need to offer up an ABC of their lives. Here she casts two of her muses, the swaggering Beatrice Dalle, and Subor, again limning an anti-hero of tremendous complexity.
Godard's camera work, with her eye for ravishing colors, can always be depended on for glorious, thoughtful images. As usual with Denis, the music is a perfect complement.
Camera (color, Cinemascope), Agnes Godard; editor, Nelly Quettier; music, S.A. Staples; production designer, Arnaud de Moleron; costume designer, Judy Shrewsbury; sound (Dolby Digital), Jean-Louis Ughetto; sound designer, Christophe Winding; assistant director, Jean-Paul Allegre. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (competing), Sept. 9, 2004. (Also in Toronto Film Festival -- Visions.) Running time: 129 MIN.

 


Claire Denis 's tactile tone poems are premised on the primacy of sensory experience. Beau Travail  (1999), her ecstatic Billy Budd   distillation, pushed her pictographic style in the direction of a new language, a nonverbal mode that she continued to toy with in films as disparate as the vampire gorefest Trouble Every Day  and the hookup reverie Friday Night . Allergic to the dictates of linear storytelling, her movies have grown increasingly convulsive in their ellipses and associations—more than any other narrative filmmaker working, Denis chases the rapture of rupture. Her latest feature, The Intruder , is a decisive breakthrough—her most poetic and primal film to date, as thrilling as it is initially baffling.
It's clear enough that The Intruder  is a dying man's long goodbye; whether it's a final accounting of a guilty conscience, a premonition of the hereafter, or a little of both is harder to say. There's a fair chance at least half the movie takes place in the protagonist's head. But Denis declines to distinguish between planes of reality: Fluidly merging an interior and an exterior journey, the film establishes a dreamy parity between memory and anticipation, fact and hallucination. Denis claims as inspiration French philosopher Jean-Luc Nancy 's "L'Intrus," an account of his heart transplant that ponders the existential implications of this corporeal intrusion. Denis, more intuitive than analytical, applies the text's pungent sense of internal foreignness—along with its push-pull of encroachment and rejection—not just to the human body but also to the natural world, border crossings, post-colonial dynamics, fathers and sons.
For what is essentially an adaptation of a metaphor, The Intruder  is almost shockingly concrete. Its intractable physicality owes much to Michel Subor , a man's-man presence in the lead role, and the imposing landscapes in which he's often framed. A weathered re- cluse, Subor's Louis lives with his beloved huskies in a mountain cabin near the Franco- Swiss border. Peripheral characters are glimpsed: an estranged son (Grégoire Colin ), a dog breeder (Béatrice Dalle ), a pharmacist fuck buddy (Bambou). At one point, Louis arranges for a heart transplant, negotiating with a black-market trader (Katia Golubeva ), who later assumes the role of his stalking conscience–cum–angel of death.
Nancy terms his transplant a "metaphysical adventure"—and the phrase perfectly describes Denis's film as well. With a new ticker, Louis escapes to the other side of the world, in search of a new life—or a place to die. The Intruder imagines the post-transplant condition as a simultaneous rebirth and afterlife. As the languorous last rites for a man slowly expiring (or already dead), The Intruder  at times suggests Jim Jarmusch 's Dead Man ; echoing Neil Young 's ominous score, Tindersticks  frontman Stuart Staples  fashions a hypnotic guitar loop on the soundtrack, an invitation to submit to the film's churning eddies.
Louis has a shady past, lots of money, and blood on his hands. Stopping off in Geneva  and Pusan , he ends up in Tahiti , looking for a son he says he once fathered; in a discordantly light and funny sequence, the indulgent islanders hold an audition for suitable candidates. There's a coldness—one might say heartlessness—to Louis's quest, reducible as it is to a series of monetary transactions. He buys a new vital organ, a new ship, and even a new son (though he can't quite shake off the old one).
Intrusion is the theme—as well as the organizing principle—of this subliminally violent film. The identity of the intruder and the nature of the incursion are continually shifting. The title most obviously refers to Louis's grafted organ, a stranger within, but also to the dreams that come with it—hauntings that invade his consciousness so completely that we and he can no longer tell the difference. The second half's hemispheric inversion positions Louis himself as the intruder. In the most astonishing of the formal intrusions, Denis splices in Subor-in- Tahiti from four decades ago, using clips from Le Reflux , Paul Gégauff 's unfinished adaptation of Stevenson's The Ebb Tide .
Cinematographer Agnés Godard ensures that almost every image leaves a retinal imprint, even more so the less explicable ones: a heart palpitating in the snow, a sunbathing Louis spooning with his dogs, an infant in a sling beaming up at his father, rainbow streamers billowing off a newly christened ship, two men in knee-deep water hoisting a mattress ashore, a cloth-covered coffin on a forklift. In a shot that lasts nearly two minutes (and feels longer), we see the immense ocean from a bobbing ship deck. The finale, as orgasmic as Beau Travail 's Eurodisco exclamation, is a delirious blur of motion, Dalle and her huskies sledding into the snowy wilds. This mysterious object may be Denis's most gorgeous film (which is saying something), but more than that, it's a fearless filmmaker's boldest experiment yet, a direct line from her unconscious to yours.
