 “Irina Palm” may be the work of a German-born Belgian director, but it belongs to a sturdy and very British genre: the naughty-granny comedy, in which an older woman is liberated and rejuvenated by an excursion into vice. In this case the iffy activity is sex for hire, which may give the film a jolt of topicality for New York audiences. The workaday London sex shop where parts of “Irina Palm” take place is decidedly down-market compared with the Emperor’s Club V.I.P., but it also may be less tawdry. In this kind of movie, sleaze and salaciousness are quickly banished in favor of sentimental good cheer.  Still, “Irina Palm,” directed by Sam Garbarski from a screenplay by Philippe Blasband and Martin Herron, does rise slightly above the silly clichés embedded in its story. This is mostly because of Marianne Faithfull, who plays Maggie, a middle-class suburban widow preparing to settle into a meek and marginal old age. Maggie has a few friends, but her great love is for her grandson, Olly, whose life is threatened by an illness that can be cured only by an experimental treatment available in Australia that his family can’t afford. This fact efficiently disarms any prudish objections to Maggie’s behavior, since the life of an innocent child is at stake.  And so she finds her way to London, where she innocently answers a want ad and finds herself ensconced in the cozy, comical demimonde of prostitution. To minimize implausibility and avoid making the audience uncomfortable, the filmmakers contrive to give Maggie a specialty that does not involve penetration or face-to-face contact with clients. Instead she sits alone in a room with a hole in the wall and provides a form of satisfaction suggested by her professional pseudonym, which is also the movie’s title. And she’s so skilled that men are soon lining up and insisting on her special services.  Her warmth and sensible good humor also endear Maggie to her boss and some of her co-workers, and before long she is glowing with renewed confidence and self-esteem. Of course predictable dangers and complications loom on the horizon. But the rather shopworn plot of “Irina Palm” is buoyed by Mr. Garbarski’s sense of realism — he manages to make the movie look and feel as if it were a slice-of-life drama rather than a preposterous fable — and above all by Ms. Faithfull.  Without showiness or actorly straining — but with a faint aura of rock ’n’ roll sexual glamour still hovering around her — Ms. Faithfull explores a full and fascinating range of emotion. Maggie is weary and timid at first, bruised by grief and by a sense of diminished prospects. To see her recover her toughness and humor is moving and satisfying despite the dubious narrative machinery that enables her rebirth. “Irina Palm” is, for the most part, a phony trifle, but at its heart, somehow, is a real and fascinating person.

Rock icon Marianne Faithfull stars in "Irina Palm" as a mousey woman who takes a job in a sex club to pay for emergency medical treatment for her grandson. Tonally all over the place, pic is built around a would-be humorous script, but jiggery lensing and gloomy lighting suggest helmer Sam Garbarski ("The Rashevski Tango") is under some delusion that he's making a slice of gritty realism with romantic undertones. Astonishingly, pic reaped hearty guffaws at Berlinale press show, suggesting this might play best in Europe, but Anglophone auds are more likely to give "Palm" the thumbs down.
Widowed Maggie (Marianne Faithfull) has sold her home in her small English village to pay for extra medical care for her 10-year-old grandson Olly (Corey Burke), who's dying of an unspecified disease. Her son Tom (Kevin Bishop) and daughter-in-law Sarah (Siobhan Hewlett) desperately want to fly Olly to Australia for a last-chance medical procedure but can't afford it.
While wandering through Soho, one of London's preeminent red-light districts, Maggie enters strip bar Sex World to ask about a job advertised in their window for a "hostess," thinking it would involve cleaning up and making tea. Owner Miklos (Serbian thesp Miki Manojlovic, from Kusturica's "When Father Was Away on Business") explains he's actually looking for someone to masturbate customers who stick their organs through holes in a wall.
Maggie is too tempted by the promised weekly wage of £400-£600 (approximately $800-$1,100) not to give it a try. She proves to be a dab hand, as it were, at the job, and under the pseudonym "Irina Palm" she soon builds up an eager clientele whom she services, unseen by them, while wearing an apron in a cubby hole she subsequently cozies up with pictures from home and a vase of plastic flowers -- one of pic's better gags.
When she gets a hefty loan from Miklos to give Tom and Sarah for the Australian trip, they're naturally curious about where the money came from, but Maggie keeps quiet. Nor will she tell her busybody village friends, led by Jenny Agutter's snooty Jane, what exactly is keeping her away from their regular bridge nights.
Some auds will wonder why Maggie doesn't just think up a plausible lie for the folks back home. Then again, plot is full of unexplained puzzles, like why has the family needs to raise money when the U.K.'s national health service provides care for serious diseases for free, albeit with bad food. Such details betray script's origins as a continent-set story, hastily reset in Britain when financing was found in Blighty.
Script credited to Martin Herron and Philippe Blasband might have worked better in different hands and at least produced, with a few better jokes, yet another mildly bawdy, TV-friendly Britcom along the lines of "Calendar Girls" or "Kinky Boots." Unfortunately, Garbarski's helming is too leaden and po-faced, while Faithfull, never the most expressive of actresses, performs like she's on heavy medication, never varying her delivery and barely altering her facial expression.
Monotonous guitar score by Ghinzu, which sounds like a reject from a bad recent Wim Wenders film, adds to the load of woes. Framing contrives to keep any genitals out of view, making for easier certification.
Camera (color), Christophe Beaucarne; editor, Ludo Troch; music, Ghinzu; production designer, Veronique Sacrez; costume designer, Anushia Nieradzik; sound (Dolby Digital), Pascal Jasmes, Thomas Gauder, Ingrid Ralet. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (competing), Feb. 13, 2007. Running time: 103 MIN.
 



Nobody can reduce tawdry material to doddering quaintness like the British, but this staggeringly inane joint effort of U.K., Belgian, French, German, and Luxembourgian film financing represents a true coalition of the witless. With her dying grandson unable to afford life-saving treatment in Australia—so much for Michael Moore 's miracles of socialized medicine—a matronly middle-aged widow (Marianne Faithfull !) timidly answers a London sex club's job posting. Dutifully divested of diva-hood, Faithfull is stationed at a glory hole with enough lotion to capsize Eliot Spitzer , instructed to polish every knob that pokes through. Voila!  She finds mad money, likely romance, and newfound self-esteem, as so often happens with aging sex workers in the anonymous coin-op jerk-off trade. The whole ridiculous thing could serve as one of Lars von Trier 's lurid melodramas of female abasement, if director Sam Garbarski 's tone didn't fluctuate between kitchen-sink miserabilism and the smirky archness of a Very Special Are You Being Served? —and if it weren't such a pack of cozily sanitized lies. Except, of course, for the movie's urgent warning about the hazards of "penis elbow."
