 A sign of the season, as reliable as the first frost or the turning foliage, is the proliferation of dead, abused or endangered children on movie screens. It sometimes seems that you can’t make a serious film these days without one. Nothing cranks up the dramatic intensity quite as effectively as a child in peril — see Clint Eastwood’s “Changeling,” opening Friday (review on Page C1), for the latest evidence of this Hollywood axiom — and nothing seems to make ambitious actors happier than parental grief.  At least three movies this fall explore the durability of such grief, tracing the long shadow that a child’s death can cast over a family’s subsequent efforts at happiness. In “Rachel Getting Married,” Jonathan Demme’s ebulliently therapeutic domestic drama, the title character’s wedding is haunted by memories of the accident, some years in the past, that took the life of her younger brother. The specter of a lost boy, killed by a rare genetic disorder, also complicates the lives of his parents and surviving siblings in Arnaud Desplechin’s “Christmas Tale,” which opens next month. And “I’ve Loved You So Long,” a new French film written and directed by Philippe Claudel, is dominated by the murder, more than a decade in the past, of a 6-year-old boy.  That killing, shocking in itself, is made unimaginably more so because the murderer was the boy’s mother, Juliette, played with terrifying, heartbreaking poise by Kristin Scott Thomas. Released from prison after a 15-year sentence, Juliette moves in with her younger sister, Léa (Elsa Zylberstein), a college literature instructor with a loving husband named Luc (Serge Hazanavicius) and two adorable adopted daughters. Juliette,  affectless, chain-smoking, wrapped in a bulky overcoat, drifts through her sister’s house in the French city of Nancy like a restless ghost, unsettling the inhabitants as she struggles to emerge from a state of moral and spiritual limbo.  Mr. Claudel’s practice of fading slowly to black between scenes, and the spidery tones of Jean-Louis Aubert’s score, create an atmosphere of mystery and dread that is both appropriate to the story and a little misleading. If “I’ve Loved You So Long” is not exactly a horror movie, it is nonetheless filled with fear and foreboding. What Juliette did is hidden from her nieces and also from Luc and Léa’s social circle, into which she makes a few tentative steps. And the particulars of Juliette’s crime are left unspoken, even as Léa (like the audience) can barely contain her curiosity. Is her sister a penitent, a madwoman or a monster? Does her quiet, decorous, depressive manner represent a longing for peace or the sublimated threat of further violence? Why did she do it?  Luc, not unreasonably, is terrified — fearful for the safety of his own children and also perhaps somewhat superstitious about giving evil a place in his home. And Ms. Scott Thomas does not rush to dispel the possibility that Juliette, polite and pretty as she is, might also be a person of irreducible depravity.  Out of either pride or abjection  (the artistry of Ms. Scott Thomas’s performance lies in confounding such distinctions), she refuses to solicit sympathy, or to offer reciprocal, reassuring warmth when it comes her way. But as Juliette makes her way from one day to the next  — picking up a stranger for sex, looking for a job, forming tentative bonds with her nieces and with Luc’s father, figuring out how to be friends with her needy, nervous sister  — it becomes clear that the film is, at bottom, a story of rehabilitation and healing.  This kind of narrative is familiar enough, and so are the risks of sentimental talk-show piety associated with it. Luckily, Ms. Scott Thomas’s furious honesty rules out easy, unearned redemption, as does the film’s tough-minded resistance to the temptations of melodrama. A first-time director with a literary background (like Léa he teaches in Nancy, and he has published several novels), Mr. Claudel is gratifyingly absorbed in details of setting and character. And even though the unfathomable horror in Juliette’s past dominates everything else, the small felicities and absurdities of real life manage to peek through the gloom.  Juliette is alive, whether or not she wants to be, and the project she finds herself involved in, half-heartedly at first, is one of rehumanization. This is accomplished through contact with other people (including a colleague of Léa’s, played by Laurent Grevill) and also through activities like reading, looking at paintings and going to the cinema. In an entirely believable and matter-of-fact way, Mr. Claudel’s film makes a case for the psychological and ethical necessity of art.  He also includes a warning against overstating the case, in a remarkable scene involving Léa and her students, in which she berates them for treating fiction (in this case Dostoyevsky’s “Crime and Punishment”) as an exalted reflection of life. Her fury arises in part from her own inability to make sense of Juliette, or of the tangle of contradictory feelings her sister inspires.  The film, in the end, turns away from the Dostoyevskian implications of Juliette’s crime and its expiation. A revelation comes near the end that is both tremendously moving and a bit disappointing, in the way that the solutions to great mysteries frequently are. This turn   does not diminish the accomplishment of Ms. Scott Thomas’s deep, subtle and altogether stunning performance, but it does alter the scale of the movie, turning it into a more manageable, less existentially unsettling drama. Which is a relief, I suppose, but also a bit of a letdown.  “I’ve Loved You So Long” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has extremely upsetting themes and references and a lot of cigarette smoking.

Two sisters who haven't seen each other for 15 years gradually rediscover common ground and a way of relating to each other in "I've Loved You So Long," a movie that is utterly engrossing despite being, on the surface, about very little. Toplined by Kristin Scott Thomas as the slightly frumpy older sister, this first feature by teacher-turned-scripter Philippe Claudel will need strong critical support to make much of a loving dent theatrically, but is a quality item for upscale French movie buffs. Pic goes out in Gaul mid-March.
First seen distractedly puffing on a cigarette as she waits for her younger sister Lea (Elsa Zylberstein) at an airport, Juliette (Scott Thomas) is a plainly dressed, middle-aged woman with tired hair and even more tired eyes, whose backstory slowly emerges throughout the picture. Lea, married to lexicographer Luc (Serge Hazanavicius), has a full life that includes raising two adopted Vietnamese daughters and looking after Luc's ailing father (Jean-Claude Arnaud).
Explaining "auntie" Juliette's sudden appearance, Lea tells her pushy elder daughter Lys (Lise Segur) that she's "been away for a long time, and in England" -- a convenient explanation for British thesp Scott Thomas' slight accent. In fact, as is revealed a half-hour in, Juliette has been in prison for 15 years for killing her 6-year-old son.
Film is basically about people rebuilding emotional ties to a point where they can start a new life together, and Juliette herself can find closure with her sister. Though Lea's own family life has been affected by Juliette's crime -- which left Lea with a fear of giving birth -- she takes a major chance by inviting her older sister to stay with her.
Claudel's script is built out of everyday, unmelodramatic events, succinctly dialogued and not nearly as downbeat as the movie sounds on paper: Juliette trying to find a job, Juliette taunted by a friend (Olivier Cruvellier) at a dinner party, Juliette befriended by Lea's colleague Michel (Laurent Grevill). But pic's hub is the relationship between the two sisters -- one who's been ground down by years of guilt, and another who's opened a door for her sister to walk through if the latter so chooses.
Scott Thomas is aces in the lead role, with flashes of mordant wit that prevent it from becoming a dreary study in self-pity. Zylberstein, a variable actress who's very dependent on her directors, is good here, but lacks Scott Thomas' quiet heft and can't quite handle Lea's occasional emotional outbursts. Still, the sisters' dramatic final talk works just fine.
Setting in Nancy, eastern France, in Claudel's home province of Alsace-Lorraine, allows the characters to develop naturally, unencumbered by the familiar sites of a city like Paris. Jerome Almeras' lensing is bright and well composed, and pacing is easy, making the almost two-hour running time pass smoothly.

Kristin Scott Thomas  has gotten so locked into playing tragic victims or frigid grandes dames that few remember the actress got her big break as a wistfully amused friend in Mike Newell 's Four Weddings and a Funeral , or that she played Plum Berkeley on Absolutely Fabulous . Thomas has mischief in her, and a rare smile fluorescent enough to light up the world. So it was a treat earlier this year to watch her barrel through Guillaume Canet 's Tell No One  as a brash lesbian with an asp's tongue and a loyal heart. Still, no actress I can think of has done more, by doing less, to give aloof a good name. One basilisk stare from those icy, pale eyes in Charles Sturridge 's A Handful of Dust  or Robert Altman 's Gosford Park  was enough to wither anyone within inches of her snooty presence.
Carnal passion has never been Thomas's strong suit, which may be why she rarely gets top billing. Though she lacked the transgressive heat to play an unfaithful wife in Anthony Minghella 's wan The English Patient , there was something weirdly compelling about her pairing with the equally impacted Ralph Fiennes . And as Juliette, a Frenchwoman newly released from prison in Philippe Claudel 's I've Loved You So Long , Thomas is so relentlessly unbending that she almost had me believing the movie had something brave to say about mothers who murder their children.
Whey-faced, gray-skinned, and devoid of makeup (on that front alone, so beloved of Academy voters, Thomas and Anne Hathaway  will be duking it out for Best Actress come February), Juliette slumps in a small-town French airport lounge in a dated coat several sizes too big for her slender body, her blue eyes registering a diffuse misery that no one should mistake for defeat. When her younger sister Léa (Elsa Zylberstein ) arrives to pick her up, the two exchange awkward pecks on the cheek, and Juliette is equally brusque with Léa's less-than-welcoming husband Luc (Serge Hazanavicius), and the couple's two little girls, both adopted from Vietnam . Juliette sets out to rebuild her life with brutal honesty about the fact that she did 15 years for killing her young son and a fierce intolerance for tact from others, well-meaning or not, who have no idea how to approach her. Her recalcitrant candor is both self-destructive and a twisted form of survival in a cushy 21st-century world that seems to her like a foreign country. "Was it good?" preens the stranger she picks up in a bar and sleeps with. "No, not at all" she says flatly. "But it doesn't matter." By turns belligerent and indifferent, Juliette is a stubborn refutation of movie mothering down the Hollywood  ages.
Uncompromising and full of necessary enigma, Thomas's performance makes us feel what it might be like to live out the rest of your life after you have killed your own child. So it's a pity that, before too long, the movie starts paying out broad hints to prepare us for the warming trend and special pleading that will let both its anti-heroine and its audience off the hook. Claudel is a middlebrow novelist of some note in France, and as a director, he capably evokes the leisurely emergence of character and the choppy ebb and flow of domestic emotion. I've Loved You So Long  is a modestly satisfying tale of sisterly love weighed down by a history of family betrayal and mendacity.
Zylberstein, who has worked with Raúl Ruiz  and Chantal Akerman  but is best known in this country for her debut role as a young Jewish woman in the lovely 1994 film Mina Tannenbaum  ,  is touchingly fragile and desperate as the younger sister who, for all her worldly success as a college professor surrounded by family and friends, still wants nothing more than to win back the approval of the older sibling who once cared for her. Their quietly ambivalent struggles are the movie's backbone, but Claudel seems bent on making I've Loved You So Long  as softly inoffensive as the beloved French lullaby from which it takes its title. Redemption shows up reliably in the form of a sensitive single male (Laurent Grévill ), who has taught in prisons and knows how Juliette feels; a stroke-ridden, yet somehow serene granddad (Jean-Claude Arnaud ), who provides her with the quiet solitude she craves; and the requisite bad news that will shock her into sharing a secret that neatly slips the burden of guilt off her shoulders. Solicitously shepherding us into the shallows of the therapeutic women's novel, Claudel tamps down his magnificently intransigent Hedda Gabler , and makes her gently weep just when she should be baying at the moon.
