
It's called "The Jane Austen Book Club." But it's a lot like a pumpkin spice frappuccino with extra sugar and extra cream. You'll laugh. You'll cry. You'll leave with foam on your nose. So cute. As a friend said on the way out: At least no books were harmed in the making of this movie. And he's right. But that's only because no one really tried.
Robin Swicord's movie is so respectful of Austen that it doesn't challenge her eminence with many ideas of its own. Five Sacramento women and one man form a group devoted to discussing the author's six novels, and, inevitably, the lives of Swicord's characters take on some of the complications of Austen's.
For Swicord, Austen is a religious denomination, and her novels, as one character flippantly observes, comprise a bible. The religion just needs a better church. For instance, the opening credits play over a harried montage of mishaps - dropped laptops, vending machines that don't vend, the parking spot stolen just as you were about to pull in. It feels less like Jane Austen and more a prelude to a song Alanis Morissette never got around to writing.
Swicord adapted the movie from Karen Joy Fowler's novel, and both are ambitious works of fluff devoted to a bourgeois posse. After 20-odd years of marriage, Sylvia (Amy Brenneman) has just been dumped, and all she can think about is her husband (Jimmy Smits). Her unmarried best friend, Jocelyn (Maria Bello), tries to set up Sylvia with the lone man in the group, a rich tech-services guy named Grigg (Hugh Dancy), who's actually hot for Jocelyn. Obviously, she wants him, too, but doesn't exactly know it. Sylvia's thrill-seeking daughter, Allegra (Maggie Grace), is prone to tumbling off walls, out of planes, and into love with cute girls.
Her opposite is an unhappily married, uptight high-school French teacher named - wait for it - Prudie, and played by Emily Blunt. Prudie has a workaholic husband (Marc Blucas), a student (Kevin Zegers) madly in love with her, and a chronically stoned hippie mother, whom Lynn Redgrave incarnates as a gorgon. Rounding out things is Kathy Baker as Bernadette, the wisest, feistiest woman in the group.
Most of the actors have an unwavering grip on their roles, which keeps the movie entertaining. The characters come in one shade, but some of the cast, especially Blunt and Dancy, use the crayons well. Still, this is the kind of movie that doesn't trust us to catch the resemblance between a character here and one Austen heroine. Instead, Sylvia has to say, "I feel like Fanny Price from 'Mansfield Park.' "
In fact, watching these people dissect Austen's books is fun until you realize that every character except Baker's is such a prisoner of her life that she can only view the novels through the prism of her own problems.
The most fascinating ideas in the movie involve gender, how men perceive Austen's books as chick lit and how women can disabuse them of that notion. But the ladies make it look much too easy. What man would break down and read "Persuasion" to save his marriage? "The Jane Austen Book Club" finds a whopping two.
There is one very nicely done touch, though, between Jocelyn and Grigg, who explains that some of his favorite science-fiction authors were women who wrote under men's names. He respectfully agrees to join the club on the condition that Jocelyn read some Ursula K. Le Guin, which out of snobbery she initially refuses to do. This is the most authentically Austenian thing about this movie. His sci-fi pride melts her literary prejudice.


         The notion of Jane Austen as palliative for all that ails you reaches its warm and cuddly apotheosis in "The Jane Austen Book Club," adapted from the novel by Karen Joy Fowler. Capably, if not exactly artfully directed by longtime screenwriter, first-time feature director Robin Swicord, "Book Club" is a widget carefully engineered to comfort, console and sell like hot cakes since it was but a gleam in the author's eye, and Swicord doesn't mess with the formula.
 
 When Jocelyn (Maria Bello) loses her beloved dog to the great beyond and Sylvia (Amy Brenneman) loses her beloved husband to a woman from the office in the same week, their friend Bernadette (Kathy Baker) decides what they need is a six-pack of Jane and some company. Standing in line at the movies she meets a dedicated Austen fan named Prudie (the excellent Emily Blunt), a depressed French teacher unhappy in her marriage, and invites her to join too. Meanwhile, Jocelyn meets a handsome young geek at a convention and invites him to join -- for Sylvia, of course. She's a matchmaker. Rounding out the group is Sylvia's daughter Allegra (Maggie Grace), an impulsive and heedlessly romantic young lesbian.
 


         






   All of them, needless to say, find themselves in various states of grief, crisis, confusion or denial. And all of them mirror an Austen heroine of their own. (Prudie is Fanny, Jocelyn is Emma, Allegra is Marianne, and so on.)
 
 The movie is divided into six sections centering on one of the novels and the attendant discussion/parallel universe situation being experienced by the discussion leader. As the themes in the books stir up the problems in their lives, things start to get volatile.
 
 Hugh Dancy is charming as the odd-man-out Grigg, a science-fiction lover who joins the group to be close to Jocelyn (who keeps pushing him on Sylvia). Naturally, he gets the lemon, "Northanger Abbey" (no hate mail, please), but makes lemonade by turning his horrible McMansion in neo-suburbia into a haunted house for the club meeting.
 
 The movie's best sequence is its opening, in which Swicord depicts modern life as a funny, remarkably well-observed symphony of small annoyances only occasionally punctuated by tragedy or joy. Between those, there's traffic, listening to other people's cellphone calls, lost parking tickets, card-swipe machines that can't read your card, robotic voices programmed to sound sympathetic, leaf blowers, spilling coffee on yourself in the car, yanking the laptop to the floor by the power chord when you get up to go to the bathroom and then dropping the phone into the toilet. This is genius. Also nice is seeing a movie so alive to the pleasures of reading and writing and sharing books, especially when the love feels sincere.
 
  With its multiple protagonists and episodic structure, "The Jane Austen Book Club" probably lost plenty in the translation to film and, in parts, the story feels awkwardly truncated or too shallow to matter. But Swicord has a playful sense of humor and a good ear for dialogue, and the movie pleasantly accomplishes what it set out to accomplish. "It's a perfect antidote to life," is how Bernadette somewhat outrageously characterizes poor, dead Jane's six near-perfect novels. But an antidote to life is exactly what the "Jane Austen Book Club" is proud to be, which is great, I guess, if you're allergic to life.
 

 
 "The Jane Austen Book Club." MPAA Rating: PG-13 for mature thematic material, sexual content, brief strong language and some drug use. Running time: 1 hour, 43 minutes. In general release.   

There's comfort to be had in the plot geometry of The Jane Austen  Book Club , a photogenic adaptation of Karen Joy Fowler's 2004 best-seller. Behold six  Austen books, six book-club members who meet over the course of six months, six California lifestyle stories that echo the romantic dilemmas faced by Austen's characters,  and one chance to see The Devil Wears Prada 's Emily Blunt as a prissy high school French teacher who bugs the group with her airs. For a visual bonus, Hugh Dancy appears in bike shorts as the lone male Jane-ite.

 “The Jane Austen Book Club” is such a well-acted, literate adaptation of Karen Joy Fowler’s 2004 best seller that your impulse is to forgive it for being the formulaic, feel-good chick flick that it is.  After all, aren’t novels that fall under that noxiously condescending rubric contrived to reassure readers by offering them secondhand problem-solving advice? Like it or not, Jane Austen is a rock on which the genre was founded. So why shouldn’t a novel and the movie adapted from it acknowledge the connection in a way that is smart and amusing as well as comforting?  A tightly knit ensemble piece directed and written by Robin Swicord, the film adroitly shuffles nine characters (five women and four men) and throws in a too-brief cameo by Lynn Redgrave as one woman’s dissipated, post-hippie mother.  You can question the story’s conceit that the novels of Austen are an ideal guidebook to personal fulfillment for the modern American woman. But as the members of a Jane Austen reading group, who live in Sacramento, analyze the behavior of the characters in her novels, the movie is also a savvy course on how to read a novel of manners. If that novel has any depth, the characters’ motives are open to interpretation. Is a knight in shining armor really Mr. Right? Does a happy ending really augur happily ever after? What are so-and-so’s real motivations?  For these likable women and the one man who joins their group, which meets monthly to discuss a different Austen novel at each session, Austen’s books serve as mirrors and Rorschach tests in which the members recognize themselves and their romantic peccadilloes. The discussions in these  group-therapy sessions lead them toward solutions to their problems. The screenplay includes just enough references to characters and plot developments in Austen novels to whet your appetite for reading or rereading them, but not so many that it alienates the uninitiated.  The movie gets foolishly carried away only once, when it suggests that a clueless macho boor, pressured to read Austen by his neglected wife, is magically transformed into a cuddly enlightened tomcat purring with empathy. I didn’t believe it for a minute. But I like the idea of a great British author from another century casting such a spell. If Shakespeare can do it, why not Austen?  The movie glamorizes Ms. Fowler’s characters in ways large and small. Several are a decade younger in the film than in the book, and all are attractive. Grigg (Hugh Dancy), the lone man, has been transformed from a temp in a university linguistics department in his 40s into a cute-as-a-button Silicon Valley techie and possible genius in his early 30s. Having grown up with three older sisters, this puppyish man-child and science-fiction fanatic who compares an Austen novel to “The Empire Strikes Back” is charmingly feminized without being effeminate.  The rest of the lineup is as follows: Bernadette (Kathy Baker), the group’s founder, is a six-times-married dynamo in her mid-50s who is both free-spirited and maternal. Her close friend Jocelyn (Maria Bello), a control freak and dog fancier who breeds Rhodesian Ridgebacks, fancies herself above the human mating game.  Sylvia (Amy Brenneman), happily married for 25 years, imagines she has it all, then falls apart when her husband, Daniel (Jimmy Smits), breaks the news that he is having an affair with a woman in his law firm and wants to end their marriage. The couple’s lesbian 20-ish daughter, Allegra (Maggie Grace), who has an active love life and a secret addiction to extreme sports like skydiving,  moves back home to keep Sylvia company.  Prudie (Emily Blunt), drawn into the group after meeting Bernadette in line at an Austen film festival, is a beautiful, prim, married high school French teacher. To her recently acquired husband, Dean (Marc Blucas), an uncommunicative sports nut, the author’s name only conjures the capital of Texas. As their marriage falters, she is pursued by Trey (Kevin Zegers), a handsome senior. One of the movie’s few surreal touches is a traffic sign that flashes “What would Jane do?” as Prudie contemplates meeting him in a motel.  The main plot involves Grigg’s unrequited passion for Jocelyn, who invites him into the group as a potential boyfriend for Sylvia and keeps trying to throw them together, never realizing that she herself is the one he wants. Her unlikely naïveté and his unlikely shyness gives the movie an Austen-like narrative gloss.  “The Jane Austen Book Club” isn’t any better or worse than the recent “Becoming Jane,” a fantasy of Austen’s youthful love life. Like the other movies and television projects in a Jane Austen boom that continues to gather momentum, it is an entertaining, carefully assembled piece of clockwork that imposes order on ever more complicated gender warfare.  “The Jane Austen Book Club” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It contains some strong language and sexual situations.

One character in "The Jane Austen Book Club" describes the author's novels as chick-lit that most men would enjoy if they gave it a chance; similarly, the film is a "chick flick" guys might well grok if they could be roped in. Sure, there are no CGI or explosions, but it's hard not to become engrossed in the seriocomic relationship tangles writer-director Robin Swicord deftly adapts from Karen Joy Fowler's bestselling 2004 novel. Lacking major drawing-card thesps, this polished charmer could become a sleeper hit if allowed to slowly build word of mouth and screen count.
Swicord, a veteran scenarist best known for prior lit adaptations ("Little Women," "Matilda," "Memoirs of a Geisha"), makes her directorial debut here.
There's nothing particularly stylish about "Book Club," which won't lose much in translation to the smallscreen. But it's expert in matters more crucial to the source material: managing a highly eventful narrative in brisk terms without seeming rushed; drawing moderately complex characters and conflicted relationships with economy and feeling. In those regards and others, the pic is much more satisfying than recent femme-centric adaptations "The Nanny Diaries" or "Evening," let alone the pandering, formulaic likes of "Because I Told You So."
Set in Sacramento, Calif., tale starts out with various partnerships coming to an end, or at least facing trouble. Dog breeder Jocelyn (Maria Bello) stages a funeral complete with priest and cellist for her Rhodesian Ridgeback. Their children now grown, Daniel (Jimmy Smits) informs horrified spouse Sylvia (Amy Brenneman) that "there's a logic to us quittingwhile we're ahead," especially since he's been having an affair with a law firm co-worker. High school French teacher Prudie (Emily Blunt) is crushed when jockish husband Dean (Marc Blucas) casually announces their planned Paris vacation has been preempted by a biz trip.
Prudie is found sobbing outside a revival screening of Patricia Rozema's 1999 "Mansfield Park," which she decries as distorting the novel past recognition. Her distress and ample Austen knowledge attract motherly if bossy interest from Jocelyn and Sylvia's older friend Bernadette (Kathy Baker), a garrulous survivor of six divorces.
The idea of a women's book club is hatched, dedicated solely to Austen's six novels, with each member assigned special study of one. Sylvia's sporty lesbian daughter Allegra (Maggie Grace) and rich, young software geek Grigg (Hugh Dancy) fill out the group.
Allegra falls for aspiring fiction writer Corinne (Parisa Fitz-Henley), a path, it turns out, was best not taken. Prudie considers cheating on the husband she's already unhappy with, while enduring a visit from the free-spirited hippie mother (Lynn Redgrave) whose irresponsibility left her with major trust issues. And just when Sylvia begins recovering from Daniel's departure, he has second thoughts.
Chronological narrative is chaptered by titles noting the month and its particular book club title, which protags interpret in terms of their current emotional travails. It's Fowler's savvy conceit that Austen's delightfully insightful prose can be a lightning rod for whatever a reader of any era wants or needs to discover.
Familiarity with the books (or their film adaptations) isn't required to enjoy "Club," though. While there are occasional forced notes -- cute canine reaction shots or a wrap that's awfully neat for so many messy lives -- Swicord's direction proves as accomplished as her script at handling an incident-packed story with ease, capturing humor and drama sans cheap laughs or tearjerking.
Cast is first-rate all around, unafraid to play up the annoying, insensitive or self-pitying aspects of their nonetheless likeable characters. An unrecognizably severe Blunt almost makes Prudie too much of a pill, though we understand how she got that way once Redgrave's mother makes her memorably obnoxious appearance. On the opposite end of the personality scale, Dancy radiates charm as the sheepishly smitten Grigg.
Slickly handled in all departments, the production has a warm, if conventional, look.

If you can't get enough of the Mutually Supportive Sisterhood narrative, there's every chance you'll go for this perfectly pleasant, perfectly undistinguished adaptation of a market-driven novel about six Sacramento lovelies trying to mend their stalled or broken lives while massaging each other's feet. Like most MSS stories these drearily formulaic days, this one comes accessorized with life lessons from Jane Austen , whose novels offer pregnant parallels to the dilemmas of these neurotic but nice exurban book-clubbers, plus one pretty male nerd in the inoffensive form of Hugh Dancy . You can't outright hate a movie that stars Maria Bello  (even as the capable singleton who can't commit) or the excellent Emily Blunt  (even as the nervous Nellie unable to see the good stuff right under her upturned nose) or Kathy Baker , predictably cast as the much-married port in a storm. But it's hard to tell who's panting more eagerly in pursuit of all possible chick demographics: Karen Joy Fowler , who wrote the giddily commercial novel; Robin Swicord , who wrote and directed capably enough; or the product placements that pop their merry little heads into practically every frame of this stolidly suburban romance. As for me, I eagerly await the mad bitches of Nicole Holofcener 's next movie.
