Sad to say, “A Jihad for Love” is not a sequel to the pornographic satire “The Raspberry Reich” (2004), in which pseudo-revolutionaries exhort their comely comrades to “join the homosexual intifada!” It is, rather more arduously, a dispatch from the outer limits of marginalization: a documentary on devout Muslims struggling with their homosexuality. Angst is the norm in this heartfelt debut by the filmmaker Parvez Sharma, whose documentary ranges from Johannesburg to Istanbul, from doubt to despair (with a happy detour among the drag queens of India). He does manage to locate a headstrong lesbian in Paris, albeit one whose face, like those of many of the subjects here, has been digitally blurred. “If we are truly Muslims,” runs her contradictory lament, “we have no right to alter his creation.” Mr. Sharma’s film emphasizes testimony over context to such a degree that it feels at first of little use to anyone except gay Muslims who might take comfort in knowing they’re not alone. But the documentary gains depth of feeling as it goes and even develops something of a nail-biting narrative as it follows a clique of Iranian men who flee to central Turkey in hopes of applying for political asylum in Canada.

 (Documentary -- U.S. - U.K. - France - Germany - Australia )
  By 
DENNIS HARVEY

    
 
 
 
Parvez Sharma's "A Jihad for Love" looks at the plight of gays still faithful to their Muslim beliefs, even as the majority who share that faith figure it explicitly opposed to homosexuality. Predicament makes the pic kin to 2001's "Trembling Before G-d," about gay Orthodox Jews. Both docs share the same fascination and limitation. Their subjects' bravery is impressive, their situation moving, but so few are willing to speak, and the cultures they come from so unwilling to accept them, that a certain repetitiousness soon settles in. Still, this hot-button topic will attract gay fests, select broadcasters and possible limited theatrical exposure.
A single, short passage cited in the Qur'an, along with a few quotes attributed to the prophet Mohammed, qualifies male-male sexual contact as a crime punishable by death in the view of many Islamic scholars. But some call this a distortion, saying the original text in fact referred to rape practiced by residents of ancient Sodom to humiliate visiting foreign men, not to consensual same-sex relations.
Regardless, extreme fundamentalist trends in modern-day Islam make such debates near-impossible to raise in many nations, particularly those in which homosexual acts, socializing or vaguely defined offenses like "debauchery" are criminalized. In Iran, more than 4,000 people have been executed for alleged homosexual acts since the 1979 revolution; other primarily Muslim countries levy fines, whipping, jail time or other punishments, with Turkey being one of the few relatively tolerant exceptions.
Since gay life is principally secretive and underground in the non-Western Muslim world, interviewees here tend to be emigres. Four Iranian men live in Turkey while anxiously awaiting word on whether they will be accepted as political refugees in Canada. They were outed back home when police seized a videotape of a gay wedding ceremony. Mazen was one of the "Cairo 52" arrested in a police raid on the "Queen Boat" gay disco. After spending one year in prison, he fled to Paris when it looked like he'd be handed a second, longer sentence.
Turkish Ferda introduces her girlfriend to her cheerfully accepting mother. But for many others, even exiting the closet in a more liberal adopted country might bring shame and reprisals on family and friends left behind.
Though there are a lot of fogged faces and participants identified only by first name, the pic still doesn't provide much insight into whatever gay life exists in more repressive societies -- emphasis is on those who by choice or necessity have gotten out while retaining their faith. Those stories are compelling, but a more sweeping docu treatment of the subject would be welcome, in the mode of the current gays-and-fundamentalist-Christianity overview, "For the Bible Tells Me So."
Assembly is pro. Title uses term "jihad" in its more traditional sense of personal religious struggle, as opposed to its current association with "holy war" and extremist acts.
Camera (color, HDcam), Sharma, Berke Bas; editor, Juliet Weber; music, Sussan Deyhim, Richard Horowitz. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Real to Reel), Sept. 10, 2007. Running time: 81 MIN.
 



Muslims, Jews, and Christians may have their, oh, occasional differences, but as an Islamic scholar observes early in Parvez Sharma 's documentary, there is one point on which the world's divine religions agree: Homosexuality is a crime. In his fine Trembling Before G_d , Sandi DuBowski tackled the conflict in the Orthodox Jewish community between religious stricture and sexual orientation; this DuBowski-produced doc addresses the same subject through the veil of Islam, following gay, lesbian, and transvestite Muslims abroad who hew to their faith in the face of hostile, even murderous dogma. Director Sharma's subjects—an Egyptian man arrested, imprisoned, and brutalized in 2001 essentially for the crime of attending a disco; a gay imam whose attempts to find some lenience in the Quran are fiercely rebuffed—share a perhaps puzzling devotion to a religion that, under sharia interpretation, regards their expression of love as a death-penalty offense. And yet, as in Trembling Before G_d , the movie leaves open a provocative question: If you pick and choose which tenets of a religion apply to you, is it still a religion? The conflict seems most deeply felt by Maryam, a Parisian lesbian who cherishes both women and Islam but confesses that she still considers her sexuality haraam—forbidden. The imam—whose awkward talk with his mischievous kids about the death penalty for gays is the movie's most original and emotionally complex moment—clarifies that his is a "jihad" for love in the sense of struggle, not holy war. Considering the hateful rhetoric he faces on a radio call-in show, however, he may be mistaken.
