         Torn between the competing attentions of two soldiers — one French, one German — a friendly tabby cat is eventually accused of spying, convicted of treason and executed by the French army. Like the rest of "Joyeux Noël," the scene was based on real events that transpired in December 1914. Writer and director Christian Carion shot the scene, with blanks, of course, but left it out of the final cut of the film. It upset the extras, and he felt it strained credibility.
 
  Even without the cat execution, the film offers an embarrassment of singular moments, marking the point at which war began tipping inexorably from old-fashioned brute violence into large-scale theater of the absurd and bringing into high-relief the savage absurdity of a close-range war of attrition.
 


         






    As tense and surreal as any postmodern war satire, it remains unswayed by the Byzantine fog-of-war relativism that characterizes many current (very fine) films on the subject. "Joyeux Noël" bypasses the ironic take — the reality it depicts is studded with enough ironies as it is (the high-ranking German officer, for instance, is Jewish) and makes a sincere, unembarrassed plea for sanity.
 
  The movie begins with a trope-y, but effective, sequence of scenes in which French, British and German children dutifully recite xenophobic rhymes in separate classrooms. From there, it rushes to join its adult protagonists — a French lieutenant named Audebert (Guillaume Canet); Scottish and German officers Gordon (Alex Ferns) and Hörstmayer (Daniel Brühl); and Palmer (Gary Lewis), an Anglican priest with a doggedly populist and humanist take on his job — in their respective trenches, which are located within surreal proximity of each other on the Western Front.
 
  One of the German soldiers is a famed tenor named Sprink (Benno Fürmann). In the days leading up to Christmas, his lover and singing partner Anna Sörensen (Diane Kruger) arranges for him to be granted leave to perform with her for officers on the front. After the recital, Sprink insists on returning to the trenches to sing for his men, and Anna insists on joining him. They arrive on the front as the Scots are beginning their celebration.
 
  The Germans and Anna, who is a Dane (she and Sprink are not the only international couple in the film, nor the most geopolitically crossed), are close enough to hear the bagpipes. As Sprink begins to sing, Palmer begins to accompany him, and soon Sprink is raising a tiny Christmas tree and venturing into no-man's-land. Nobody fires.
 
  Soon, Scottish, French and German soldiers have declared a truce and come together to listen to music and Mass, share army-issued champagne, chocolate and Christmas trees, and exchange addresses and trench-raid warnings. They call timeout to bury the dead, play a few soccer matches and give each others letters to mail.
 
  This strange rapprochement — as seemingly natural as it is extraordinary — is laden with tension; and the movie deftly and subtly limns the precarious line between basic human goodwill and institutionalized hatred. The soldiers, for the most part, are bakers, farmers and shopkeepers — simple men with more in common with one other than with the commanders consigning them to death; and it sounds cornier than it plays to see the troops brought together in the shared languages of music and Latin Mass.
 
  Given the current miasmic context — a context that is disturbingly echoed toward the end of the film, when Palmer is sent back to his parish in disgrace, and a martinet bishop delivers a sermon on God's desire to see all Germans exterminated — the simplicity of the argument can take on the blurry edges of wishful thinking.
 
  But the war-as-hell argument is anything but a hard sell, and the uncomplicated humanism of "Joyeux Noël," with its Christmas message of peace, feels at once irrefutable and refreshing.
 
 'Joyeux Noël'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Rated PG-13 for some war violence and a brief scene of sexuality/nudity
 
 A Sony Pictures Classics release. Writer-director Christian Carion. Producer Christophe Rossignon. Cinematographer Walther van den Ende. Editor Andrea Sedlackova.   

 "Joyeux Noël," a glossy French antiwar movie with melted snowflakes in its eyes, tells the true story of an improvised Christmas truce during the first year of World War I. The visually sweeping film, written and directed by Christian Carion, is the kind of feel-good, feel-sad movie with a message that invites you to bask in the glow of communal bonhomie, as enemy soldiers lay down their arms, stagger out of their trenches and sing carols together on a frigid Christmas Eve.  If the film's sentiments about the madness of war are impeccably high-minded, why then does "Joyeux Noël," an Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film, feel as squishy and vague as a handsome greeting card declaring peace on earth? Maybe it's because the kind of wars being fought in the 21st century involve religious, ideological and economic differences that go much deeper and feel more resistant to resolution than the European territorial disputes and power struggles that precipitated World War I.  Another reason is that the movie's cross-section of soldiers from France, Scotland and Germany are so scrupulously depicted as equal-opportunity peacemakers that they never come fully to life as individuals. All are well-spoken mouthpieces for cut-and-dried perspectives that vary somewhat, according to rank, background and war experience. As ferociously as they may fight, these soldiers are civilized good guys underneath their uniforms. When they go at one another, they're only following orders.  Video: Movie Minutes Stephen Holden reviews "Joyeux Noel," a French antiwar movie that tells the true story of a Christmas truce during World War I.  The schematic story is prefaced with scenes of schoolchildren stiffly reciting nationalistic verses. We then meet Palmer (Gary Lewis), a gentle Anglican priest, who is silently aghast as two brothers, Jonathan (Steven Robertson) and William (Robin Laing), jump with joy at the prospect of leaving their dull Scottish village to go and fight. The saintly Palmer eventually follows them to the front where, soon enough, he presides over the burial of one of them.  We also drop in on a Berlin Opera performance featuring a celebrated Danish soprano, Anna Sorensen (Diane Krüger), that is interrupted by soldiers trooping onstage to announce that Germany has declared war. Anna's boyfriend, the noted German tenor Nikolaus Sprink (Benno Fürmann), is swept into battle.  Proceeding directly to the front, "Joyeux Noël" follows a French lieutenant, Audebert (Guillaume Canet), sick with fear, as he leads his men on a charge against the Germans, who are dug into a trench so close at hand that the two sides are within earshot of each other. The German side is led by Lieutenant Horstmayer (Daniel Brühl), a thoughtful multilingual officer who, when Christmas cheer breaks out, confesses that he is Jewish, adding a carefully ironed historical crease to the story, given what we know will happen in Germany only a quarter-century later.  Anna, using her connections with the Kaiser, wangles permission to give a Christmas recital at the front with  Nikolaus. While there, she entreats him to leave the war and live with her in a neutral country, but he won't hear of it. When the recital takes place (with terrible lip-synching to the voices of Natalie Dessay and Rolando Villazón), the strains of "Silent Night," heard by the French and Scots only a few hundred feet away, prompt the Scots to chime in with a bagpipe serenade. Heads pop up from the trenches, and when it looks safe, the soldiers pull themselves into view. And so, on the wings of melody under the moonlight, an interlude of peace, brokered by the German, French and Scottish officers, is declared.  As the two sides mingle, Champagne is poured, gift packets of goodies are shared, and photos of wives and girlfriends are exchanged. The treaty is extended into Christmas Day, when the two sides skirmish in a jolly soccer game and agree to maintain the truce long enough to bury their dead.  The consequences are dire. Soldiers on both sides are reprimanded and punished for  fraternizing with the enemy. But this downbeat aftermath is underplayed to prolong the  misty-eyed sentimentality. Late in the movie, in a desperate stab at contemporary relevance, "Joyeux Noël" throws in a sinister Anglican bishop (Ian Richardson) delivering a clunky God-is-on-our-side sermon. This misbegotten last-minute touch is discordant, not to say bizarre.  "Joyeux Noël" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned)  for one scene of a couple in bed.
The stuff that History Channel  documentaries and European co-productions are made of, the informal truces of Christmas 1914 saw soldiers in the early days of World War I putting down their weapons to play soccer, trade photos, and sing songs with the enemy. The improbable, instantly mythic rapprochement was perhaps as wondrous to the troops as it is to an observer 100 years later; the historian Stanley Weintraub  has spoken of "troops mesmerized by the miraculous Christmas peace, a sort of waking dream they could hardly believe." Centering on a triangle of French, German, and Scots regiments near the Franco-German border, writer-director Christian Carion 's surprisingly restrained tribute spends too much time wringing its hands over the demographically correct romance between an opera singer (Benno Fürmann ) and his fair lady (Diane Kruger ), whose passionate affair is rudely interrupted by an impeccably confused and pointless war. Carion is no Jean Renoir , but he does strike an appealingly low key of tender, faintly goofy affinity between the combatants. Joyeux Noël  succeeds in portraying its men as contract players in a ridiculous production who decide to break character, finding a cocooned, suspended moment of lucid rebellion that has no place in reality.
