There's a moment in Phil Morrison's marvelous Junebug  that is so pure and moving, in such an unexpected way, that it's as if the world were opening up before you. Madeleine (Embeth Davidtz), a Chicago art gallery owner who is tall and angular, with a posh transatlantic accent, has arrived in North Carolina with her new husband, George (Alessandro Nivola). The two are staying with his family, who could modestly be described as truly, madly, deeply Southern. We're primed for a ripely funny culture clash, and the movie doesn't disappoint, as Madeleine, with her Euro double kisses, does her best to mingle with the unvarnished members of George's moody, polite, yet barely welcoming middle-class clan.
There have, by now, been so many strenuously cute indie comedies about ''quirky'' dysfunctional families and what it takes to overcome them that as you watch Junebug , you may find yourself caught entrancingly off guard by the conflicting shades of love, suspicion, tradition, and mystery that infuse this tale of lost innocence, deep roots, and what it means to come from the world of the South.
Morrison, in his debut feature, views George's family with serene comic grace: the gruff father (Scott Wilson), a putterer who speaks in affectless monosyllables; the mother (Celia Weston), a plump chain-smoker whose contempt keeps pricking the surface of her ''hospitality''; and the brother (Benjamin McKenzie), a surly screwup stunted with rage.
Madeleine, so wary yet eager to please, is our catalyst for getting to know these folks, and she forges her most surprising bond with the brother's pregnant wife, Ashley, a gloriously arrested chatterbox — she's like Scarlett O'Hara with ADD — played by Amy Adams in a performance as deep as it is delightful. She's the film's heart and also its flaky, wonderstruck soul.
2006 Oscar Nomination:  Best Supporting Actress (Amy Adams)

 "You Can't Go Home Again," warns the title of Thomas Wolfe's great final novel, published in 1940, two years after his death. When its semi-autobiographical protagonist, George Webber, outrages his friends and family with an unflattering fictional memoir about his hometown in North Carolina, he is driven into exile.  Watching "Junebug," a wise, bittersweet, beautifully acted comedy about the Southern homecoming of another George, should bring to mind thoughts of Wolfe's novel. Played to suave, courtly perfection by Alessandro Nivola, George Johnston is a lean Southern golden boy who has flown the family coop to live in Chicago. His return to his parents' North Carolina homestead after a three-year absence is an extension of a business trip undertaken by his beautiful, cultivated new wife, Madeleine (Embeth Davidtz).  An aggressive art dealer who owns a gallery that specializes in outsider art, Madeleine is wooing an eccentric painter who lives only a half-hour away from the Johnstons. As she takes turns making nice to her provincial, churchgoing in-laws and flattering the painter, David Wark (Frank Hoyt Taylor), a cranky, bigoted visionary who says he receives inspiration directly from God, "Junebug" contemplates the deeper meanings of the term outsider.  Madeleine, who is slightly older than George, is a British diplomat's daughter and has lived all over the world. This cosmopolitan sophisticate is everything George's family is not. Upon the couple's arrival, George, who has offered his wife little advance guidance as to the rules of the house, detaches and lets her fend for herself. This sleek Southern prince, who moves with a jaunty swagger just this side of arrogant, conveys the easy sense of entitlement of a man secure in the knowledge that he is his mother's darling.  If the homecoming lands the couple in the thick of America's culture wars, "Junebug" is much too subtle and knowing a film to turn its characters into talk-show clichés. At no point do you sense that anyone is a mouthpiece for a political or social position; the performances convey the weight of lives lived and decisions taken. But you feel the canyon of difference separating two ways of life.  Directed by Phil Morrison from a screenplay by Angus MacLachlan, this story of a troubled homecoming recalls "Five Easy Pieces." An air of languor saturates the movie. As the lushness of the brilliant green countryside sinks into your senses and the camera surveys the Johnstons' house room by room, the movie attunes you to the satisfactions of a less hectic way of life where the mind can relax and drift.  Madeleine gamely attends a baby shower for her sister-in-law, Ashley (Amy Adams), and a church social at which George surprises her when he displays a hidden talent by singing "Softly and Tenderly Jesus Is Calling."  Madeleine tries the hardest to bridge the cultural gap. But in semi-rural North Carolina, her elegant manners come across as slightly brittle and condescending. This a world where strong emotions are felt but kept under wraps. Religious faith takes the place of psychology. George's father, Eugene (Scott Wilson), explaining the wary behavior of his wife, Peg (Celia Weston), who takes an instant dislike to Madeleine, says quietly, "That's just her way." Peg sees Madeleine's assets as liabilities; women this pretty, thin and smart are not to be trusted.  Hard as she works to please, Madeleine never grasps the importance of family to the Johnstons, and when they face a crisis, she fails the ultimate test by not joining the family huddle.  The saddest family member is George's sullen younger brother, Johnny (Benjamin McKenzie), who lives with Ashley, his wife and former high school sweetheart, in his parents' home. Johnny works for Replacements Ltd., a factory that ships kitchenware, and is studying for his high school equivalency certificate. When Madeleine volunteers to tutor him on "Huckleberry Finn," he mistakes her friendly overtures for something more. Fearful of fatherhood, physically repulsed by his wife's condition, furiously resentful of George, he feels so trapped and humiliated by life that he communicates mostly in monosyllables and hostile sidelong glances.  Ms. Adams's incandescent Ashley floods the movie with a heartbreaking sweetness and warmth. Garrulous, childlike, more intelligent than she appears, she is in awe of her new sister-in-law and welcomes her like a visiting movie star. Only once does she respond directly to Johnny's hostility. "God loves you just the way you are, but too much to let you stay that way," she declares, and her words resound through the movie.  "Junebug," which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, omits some crucial information about its characters. It's frustrating to know so much about Madeleine's professional life and nothing about George's. His family background is also cloudy. Eugene, who appears to be retired, does woodworking as a hobby, but who is he?  "Junebug" envelops us in texture of a world the movies rarely visit. We get to know these people deeply. The film also reminds us that going home is never easy, even when you're the family's chosen one. Late in the movie, when Peg looks George in the eye and declares, her voice trembling, "You don't have a thing wrong with you, George, not a thing," you sense the pressure and possessiveness behind her words. Who wouldn't feel the need to flee that kind of love?  "Junebug" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for sexual situations and strong language.
Opening with stark shots of solitary Southern men catapulting their voices in shivery hill country hollers, Phil Morrison 's Junebug  immediately establishes a mood of uneasy meditation. This yodeling, with its pragmatic roots as essential mountain communication and present status as a purely vestigial skill, certainly qualifies as "outsider art"—something of great interest to primitivist cosmopolitan types. And it's outsider art of the visual sort that catalyzes Junebug 's tense family reunion, as thirtysomething art dealer Madeleine and her husband George make a trip to his North Carolina hometown for the dual purpose of patching up familial estrangement and cultivating a patronage relationship with a local painter, Dixie's version of Darger.
Morrison and screenwriter Angus MacLachlan sketch the defining details of the central relationship with luminous economy. We learn that the newlyweds, played by Alessandro Nivola  and Embeth Davidtz , share an electric attraction, yet are still feeling out each other's history and hang-ups. As we meet the members of George's family—guarded bleach-blonde mom (Celia Weston ); meek, fidgety dad (Scott Wilson ), resentful younger brother Johnny (The O.C. 's Benjamin McKenzie ); and Johnny's naive, over friendly, pregnant wife Ashley (the abundantly charismatic Amy Adams )—we are given just glimpses of their motivations but never the kind of explicated backstory that the considerable tension seems to warrant. Even the camera takes frequent breaks from their awkward interactions to meditate on empty, budget-quaint rooms and hot, manicured lawns. At intervals, the nowheresville quiet is augmented by the sound dropping out entirely.
It's an exhilaratingly decentered tale, with the perspective shifting around so there's no character with whom we totally identify throughout. What narrative force there is comes via the run-up to the birth of Ashley's child and the vacillation of Madeleine's potential client, a civil-war-obsessed artist played with a little too much Sling Blade  brio by Frank Hoyt Taylor . But these story arcs are trumped over and over by revelatory moments that linger far longer: the desperation of the rattling questions Ashley puts to Madeleine at every turn; brother Johnny's one thwarted flash of selflessness and one act of extreme violence; the church basement party where George sheepishly agrees to perform a hymn, to Madeleine's obvious surprise.
Morrison is fascinated by the power of what isn't spoken. His laconic, suburban Southern milieu is a welcome antidote to the rot and squalor favored by David Gordon Green , and his principals are far from Green's yammering self-analysts. In every one of Junebug 's relationships, negotiations made outside the scope of the frame have resulted in coded understandings. When behavior falls outside those routines—as when Madeleine reaches out to George's family members and ends up seeming flirtatious or condescending, or when George's mother eyes her new daughter-in-law with flashes of horror-film contempt—mundane actions can seem as strange as the self-taught painter's bloody, sexual tableaux. Morrison mostly succeeds in his attempt to show how secret knowledge can result in sudden violence as well as long-term, lived-in acceptance. There's a sense that everyone is an outsider artist of their own singular experience, and that creating even the most basic consensus is an artistic achievement in itself.
