Turns out, Japan has its very own New Jersey. Beyond the bounds of swank Tokyo live the ''Yanki,'' suburbanites known for their tracksuits, dyed hair, and tricked-out mopeds. In Kamikaze Girls  loner Momoko (actress–pop star Kyôko Fukada) rejects this world for the equally Western-inflected ''Lolita'' subculture, which prizes rococo frills over punk posturing. But when Yanki biker girl Ichigo (pop star-actress Anna Tsuchiya) gets under Momoko's lace bonnet, the two embark on a hyperstylized, supercute female-bonding odyssey, set to a J-pop soundtrack. For the Western viewer, the cultural divide acts as a saccharine filter, and Kamikaze , a cult hit in Japan, becomes a mesmerizing lesson in otherness.

 The yummy Japanese confection "Kamikaze Girls" deserves both a better title and an audience to go with it. Based on the novel "Shimotsuma Story" by the cult writer Novala Takemoto, this unassuming charmer has been saddled with a name that summons up images of fighter pilots self-immolating in the name of family and country. The girls of the film's title mostly just want to have fun (as does the director, Tetsuya Nakashima), which doesn't mean their pretty little heads are empty. It's just that thinking seems more agreeable when you're wearing a frilly bonnet and peek-a-boo knee socks that make grown men cry.  Set principally in a small town some 60 miles from Tokyo, the film traces the slow-to-boil friendship between Momoko (played by Kyoko Fukada), a devotee of the Lolita look and all things Rococo, and Ichiko (Anna Tsuchiya), a snarling Goth chick. At first, the story seems little more than an inventory of the early years and fabulous fashion choices of Momoko (the name means peach blossom), the only child of a missing mother and a "useless father." For this isolated 17-year-old, cocooned in baby-doll dresses and dreams of 18th-century art and design, life is nothing more than a performance piece in which she serves as artist, model and lone adoring fan. On Planet Momoko, everything is beautiful and festooned with delicately embroidered hearts.  The teenagers meet when Ichiko responds to an advertisement placed by Momoko, who's trying to sell her father's bootleg designer goods (junk stamped with "Versach") to raise some cash. Momoko is hooked on fashion, particularly a twee label called Baby, the Stars Shine Bright (an actual Japanese brand), but her naughty Little Bo Peep outfits don't come cheap. Enter Ichiko, moped  and mouth blazing. A Yanki ("Yankee"), Ichiko belongs to a subculture of neo-greasers partial to metal hair and jumpsuits and has her own story and plenty of attitude, both of which she happily offloads on her reluctant new acquaintance. Like Enid and Rebecca in "Ghost World," these two lonely girls travel through a world of their own creation, manufactured from the detritus of pop culture and pronounced alienation.  Shot on what appears to be lower-grade digital video (it was actually shot on 35-millimeter film), "Kamikaze Girls" has the cheerful, cheap look of a bazaar. (It even includes a few gaudy anime sequences.) The fashions will be familiar to admirers of Shoichi Aoki's  photographs of Tokyo street fashion; the music, meanwhile, sounds neo-Go-Go's, as bouncy as a wad of freshly chewed bubble gum. That makes the film a nice primer to Japanese pop culture, but there's more here than eye candy. Ichiko punctures Momoko's isolation, taking a pin to the bubble the other girl calls self, which may be a metaphor about Japan (or not). What the film does say, with infectious exuberance, is that in a world in which shopping is a Cartesian truism - in the immortal words of Barbara Kruger, "I shop therefore I am" - it's so much nicer to go with a friend.
If you value plausibility in movies, skip Kamikaze Girls ; this is the sort of picture where getting run over by a truck gives a character gorgeous hair instead of a broken hip. Prissy Momoko likes to dress Marie Antoinette . Grungy Ichigo prefers riding with a biker gang. In another film, we might wonder why these opposites become such an inseparable pair, but this is only the fourth most unbelievable concept here, right between the mother who leaves her husband for her gynecologist and the guy whose pompadour looks like a piece of postmodern architecture. Imitation, like the designer knockoffs Momoko 's dad peddles, is Kamikaze 's key theme, so it's appropriate that director Nakashima cribs from Raimi, Soderbergh, and even Russ Meyer , who would have loved the chick fight finale. He wouldn't have cared that it didn't make any sense either, though he might have preferred a chestier cast.
