William (Damian Lewis), the title character of Lodge Kerrigan's Keane , is a lost soul in free fall. He's a man who keeps himself in a state of constant, itchy motion to escape from his demons, and to catch up with them, too. For much of the film, he wanders, as if possessed, through the dingy fluorescent cavern that is New York's Port Authority bus station, riding the escalators and skulking around the Greyhound terminals, muttering to himself like a homeless man. Kerrigan trails this skittery, disheveled wreck with a hand-held camera, framing his hooded sleepless eyes in close-up. Lewis, who also stars in An Unfinished Life , has squinty, chiseled features that recall the young Steve McQueen, but in Keane  that face is on fire with torment — with the mystery that's driving it. In a dive bar, as he downs shots of vodka and stands next to a jukebox speaker to sing along with the Four Tops' ''I Can't Help Myself,'' shouting the words as though they could save him, we see him through the eyes of the patrons — as a noisy nut making a scene — but also as someone who's screaming for a redemption that won't come.
Keane , like William himself, is rarely at rest, yet the agitated motion all swirls around a fateful pinpoint in time: the moment, several months earlier, when William casually lost track of his 6-year-old daughter at that same terminal, and suddenly she was gone — abducted, presumably, never to return. William himself keeps returning, obsessively, to the scene of the crime; it's really his crime. Madness, in movies, is a tricky state to identify with, but Keane  exerts a hair-trigger emotional power. The movie draws us into complicity with someone who may be on the verge of insanity, but only because he's living with the unbearable: a chasm of fear and guilt, the torment of knowing that he lost his daughter and his own existence along with her.
Kerrigan has become a bit of a cult figure for his low-budget portraits of deep-dish psychic damage. His first feature, Clean, Shaven  (1995), showed promise, but it was a work of fragments, overpraised for its ''impressionistic'' mode of academic-tabloid horror, and Claire Dolan  (2000) suffered from a surface even more disaffected than its woeful prostitute heroine. Keane , Kerrigan's third feature, is his real breakthrough. For the first time he creates dramatic suspense, as William, trapped in his private nightmare, tries to literally relive the moment that destroyed his life. At a Jersey flophouse, he meets Lynn (Amy Ryan), a financially strapped mother, and agrees to babysit for her 7-year-old daughter (Abigail Breslin). William's salvation through this relationship may be schematic, but Keane , by the end, just about puts us inside the skin of a tender sinner who can't bear to give himself the one thing he needs: mercy.

 "Keane" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Manohla Dargis's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 13, 2004. The R-rated film opens today in Manhattan at Landmark's Sunshine Cinema, 139-143 East Houston Street, East Village.  Lodge Kerrigan keeps such a tight watch on the title character in "Keane" that at times you think the camera is going to crawl in the man's ear to take a look inside. The film opens with Keane, played by Damian Lewis, frantically searching for his daughter amid the rush-hour throngs at the Port Authority Bus Terminal. As he tugs at passers-by and grills ticket agents, Keane comes across as a man possessed, a father engulfed by tragedy, the linchpin in some evolving thriller. That he may be all three things at once is what gives this discomforting film its torque as well as a jolt of deep feeling.  In "Keane," Mr. Kerrigan both gives us a life at the edge of the abyss and pulls off a deft narrative sleight of hand. It doesn't take long to realize that the searcher, who's been keeping up a running conversation with himself while raging through the terminal, may be suffering from something other than worry. As he rips through the crowds, nervously peering from behind corners, Keane seems less like a man freaked out by his child's disappearance and more like a man in a perpetual freak-out. When at last he returns to his squalid hotel room and gulps down a beer in a single guzzle, it's as if he were a furloughed prisoner gratefully returned to his cell.  Keane ventures into the world again, though he never does leave the prison house of his mind. The question of whether he was forced inside this prison by the loss of his daughter (much less if the child even exists) gives the film the aspect of a psychological mystery, one that takes a disquieting turn when Keane meets a young woman, Lynn (Amy Ryan), and her 7-year-old daughter, Kira (Abigail Breslin). Initially, Lynn rebuffs Keane's friendly overtures, though not his offer of cash. The money eases her doubts or maybe it just reminds her of how lonely she is, and she soon invites Keane to dinner.  Suddenly, as the adults share small talk, and Keane smiles tenderly at Kira, the foundation of the story begins to shake violently. All the film's unanswered questions about this man, with his incessant chatter about a missing, perhaps phantom child, even his apparent lack of family and friends, start to surface and swirl, filling the cramped room like a poison gas. In an instant, Keane flips from a figure of tentative compassion to one of full-blown suspicion. Mr. Kerrigan isn't just playing with our sympathies; he's also playing with our assumptions. That keeps the tension going, of course, even as it also makes a strong case for even the most ostensibly unsympathetic and wretched among us. 

The close-up intensity Lodge Kerrigan brought to his study of schizophrenia in his 1993 first feature, "Clean, Shaven," powerfully confronts the viewer once again in "Keane." Very similar to its predecessor in its deep burrowing into the disturbed mind of a father looking for his daughter, new pic lacks some of the previous film's sharper edges, literally and figuratively, but is equally convincing as a portrait of a marginal man gone beyond the emotional pale. The public for this sort of harrowing ultra-realist fare is small, but combination of choice fest slots, critical support and producer Steven Soderbergh's muscle will give this a respectable profile in specialized release.
Just as "Clean, Shaven" relied to a great extent on the creepy power lead actor Peter Greene brought to it, so does "Keane" rest squarely on the exceptional talent of Damian Lewis to put it across. Red-haired British-American thesp, who first came to prominence in "Band of Brothers," is onscreen here virtually every second expressing, to varying degrees, how unbearable it must be to be responsible for the disappearance of one's child.
Plunging without preamble into the protag's desperate mindset, pic shows William Keane (Lewis), a grungy young man with a short scruffy beard, reeling through a large urban bus station and urgently asking strangers if they've seen his daughter. Unless the latter's existence is meant to be a fantasy altogether, one is made to understand through his mutterings that Keane, when looking away for just a moment, lost the girl in this very station sometime within the past year, when she was 6.
Like "Clean, Shaven," "Keane" is unsettling from the get-go, as both Lewis and the camera unsteadily sway as he talks to himself and rants in a manner that expresses a dreadful state somewhere between incurable remorse and unhinged hysteria. At some point, many parents experience the sudden gripping fear of having lost a kid in public, and "Keane" unflinchingly summons up the emotional consequences of the fruition of such a scenario.
As Keane lurches through New York City and environs, shouting at cars from the middle of the street, practically bursting out of his skull to the accompaniment of "Can't Help Myself" in a bar, taking some coke, becoming involved in a random altercation and screwing a drug-addled girl in a disco bathroom, Kerrigan paints a grim incidental portrait of what society looks like from between the cracks. And while his style is entirely his own, forged from the outset more than a decade ago, one cannot now observe the relentless close-ups and following shots of Keane trudging around town without sometimes thinking of the Belgian Dardenne brothers and a film like "The Son."
A prisoner of guilt and a hell of his own making, Keane becomes an entirely comprehensible character; if you're responsible for something like he's done, it will be impossible to even think of anything else for the rest of your life; few acts could have more all-encompassing ramifications.
Film's second half sees Keane calm down slightly after he does a favor for Lynn (Amy Ryan), a woman who's living in the same cheap hotel while sorting out apparent marital problems. It can't be a coincidence, however, that Lynn has a 7-year-old daughter, Kyra (Abigail Breslin). So as Keane pursues a very tentative relationship with the distracted Lynn, who comes to depend upon her new friend to look after Kyra, an insidious dread begins to build as to Keane's intentions with the child. Does he mean to abduct her himself? Might he repeat history by losing track of her too? Or would doing the right thing by Kyra represent the first step toward his rehabilitation?
Watching Lewis so thoroughly inhabit the demented Keane, one can only wonder how an actor can live with such a character for weeks and weeks and maintain a semblance of sanity and contact with real life. Thesp amazingly manages to find nuances of character while running his engine above the emotional red line throughout. It's a resonant, haunting performance.
Throughout, lenser John Foster's largely hand-held camera is focused either on Keane or what he's seeing, and pic's gritty look is part-and-parcel of this strong, raw work.
Camera (color), John Foster; editor, Andrew Hafitz; production designer, Petra Barchi; costume designer, Catherine George; supervising sound editor, Larry Blake; casting, Heidi Levitt, Bernard Telsey, David Vaccari. Reviewed on DVD, Los Angeles, Aug. 27, 2004. (In Telluride, New York film festivals.) Running time: 92 MIN.
 


Most movies, as things that are made , come off as massive, costly, inscrutable technological erections—like cathedrals or suspension bridges—but Lodge Kerrigan 's Keane  seems to have simply occurred of its own accord, like a gutter sapling or a piece of street drama you happened to walk by, alive and crazy and without guile. Instead of money-on-the-screen and objectified amusement, we get ferocious subjectivity, intensity of focus, bipolar exhalations in our face. Kerrigan makes it look easy: Keane  was shot on the shoulder in Manhattan, centers on a single character, and is composed almost entirely with a one-scene-one-shot reductivism. At times it feels like a film lost from the Dardennes' closet; at others, it's as distressing an immersion in first-person intimacy as you'll ever have outside time spent with your own deranged friends and family.
Kerrigan's Beckettian lost one is a man any urban dweller knows well: essentially homeless, absolutely alone, living on disability, and borderline psychotic. We meet Keane (Damian Lewis ) first pleading with Port Authority clerks for help finding his daughter, who (he says) disappeared months earlier on his watch from a boarding platform nearby. Of course, whether or not this is even remotely factual is a question Kerrigan not only doesn't answer, but finds irrelevant—Keane is a painfully specific figure but at the same time a totem, lean and frightening, for a morass of modern anxieties. That might be this phenomenal film's emergent achievement: Its raw hopelessness is its universality. If Keane's life is a hurricane of delusions and terrifying mistakes, it's nothing we can't easily imagine for ourselves.
Damian Lewis, vet of HBO 's Band of Brothers , commits himself to the role's interior shitstorm with unrelenting energy, and it's a triumph of post-Method selflessness when you also consider the claustrophobic proximity of DP John Foster 's camera, and the fact that the scenes play out in real time, in crowded midtown hubs. The film leaves its first purple bruises as Keane hunts the bleak New York in-between zones for clues to a daughter it is clear he'll never find (times of day and bystanding strangers take on nerve-racking importance), but sometimes he forgets his mission, scores coke, and even gets laid in a nightclub bathroom. He crosses flop-hotel paths with a desperate mom (Amy Ryan ) and her pensive seven-year-old daughter (Abigail Breslin ), giving Keane cause on one hand to try to realign himself into something socially presentable, and on the other to rescue himself with magical thinking and a hair-raising re-enactment of the dreadful moment when he thinks his life went wrong.
Kerrigan might well believe that movies tell us too much about what we should already know, and so the story material churned up between the scabby-knuckled Keane and Breslin's sleepy-voiced schoolgirl happens largely in your head—what he's thinking, what he's going to do, what kind of transmission between memory and reality is fueling his actions, what sort of risk the little life- battered tyke is obliviously running. Once baby boomers took over Hollywood , parental anxiety became the commonest trope in movies, but Kerrigan (a recent father) knows its latent power, and keeps his cards face down.
Kerrigan's third complete film, Keane  revisits textual avenues he explored in his first, Clean, Shaven (1994); now there are fewer ellipses and a saner grip on psychology. They're both astonishing experiences, but while Keane  is more incisive, its purity of execution musters some blowback. The spectacle of Lewis's public meltdowns, with the hovering cameraman inches away, sometimes trumps the character. At the same time, we are not permitted to see very much more than what the soul-sick protagonist sees—visually, the movie has the warp and woof of an OD—and the cumulative effect is quietly appalling. (Expect to crave distance, like a cutaway shot from across the room or street.)
All the more dazzling, then, is the sly emotional arc and invisibly heroic denouement—both more clearly read on a second viewing, if you could conceive of wanting to see Keane  twice. And although Lewis holds the film in his bloodshot gaze, Breslin is its secret weapon: utterly convincing, wary but naive, saddened by adult inconstancy but heart-rendingly susceptible to hope and attention. For her part, Ryan needs no expository dialogue to project her weary, cash-in-the-pocket mother: The weather of disappointment has left her limp and bitter. Kerrigan may have a Cassavetes-like brilliance in nailing down naturalistic performances, but it scans like the life we know, in hard times—watching people fray and implode when you're waiting on a line in some decaying public office, or stuck in Port Authority wishing you could be anywhere else.
