According to the paltry biographical information provided with the music documentary "Kill Your Idols," its director, cameraman and editor, S.  A. Crary, was born in Hawaii where he "learned how to march before he learned how to dance" and "held a gun before he held a girl's hand." That's cute, but perhaps more telling is that the video maker was born in 1978, just around the time that aficionados of orchestrated mayhem were paying homage to Lydia Lunch, then radiating spit and dark energy across downtown New York in her role as the lead singer cum banshee for the No Wave band Teenage Jesus and the Jerks. Ms. Lunch appears all too briefly in "Kill Your Idols," cropping up both in abused black-and-white film clips shot by East Village anti-auteurs like Richard Kern and Nick Zedd and in a rather more sedate recent color video interview shot by Mr. Crary. With her trademark sneer somewhat tempered and her familiar peekaboo décolletage in full bosomy bloom, Ms. Lunch makes for a resplendent, predictably entertaining witness to the whole No Wave scene  — an offshoot of punk, the anti-New Wave  — when the music was noisy (and genuinely noncommercial),  the clothes were black (and genuinely secondhand) and the only rich people trolling Avenue B were looking to cop a nickel bag, not nibble a $60 sashimi sampler. You don't get much of the old downtown trip or much of anything interesting in "Kill Your Idols," though it is nice to amble briefly  along memory lane with the jowly, dryly funny Glenn Branca (founder of Theoretical Girls), the perennially boyish Thurston Moore (Sonic Youth) and Arto Lindsay (DNA), who still looks as if he should be wearing a pocket protector and a "Hello, Ask Me About Our Specials!" ID tag, only grayer. Missing in action, well, there are too many to mention, though among the most notable is James Chance, who after leaving Teenage Jesus went on to create one of the bigger and more danceable No Wave songs, "Contort Yourself," two words that nicely describe the moment and its anarchic pleasures. That moment flickered out not long after it ignited, extinguished by success or (mostly) the lack thereof, along with the usual personal miseries and the seismic socioeconomic shifts that eventually transformed all of downtown, stripping away the dirt and the danger and making it safe for lifestyle lofts and those sashimi samplers.  But that's another story, one conspicuously and ridiculously missing in "Kill Your Idols." Despite his access to both No Wave luminaries and atmospherically battered footage of various bands wreaking  havoc at various venues, Mr. Crary never figures out what story he wants to tell. And so, after checking in with the oldsters, he checks out newbies like the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, whose connection to once-upon-a-downtown-time remains as elusive here as Mr. Crary's entire enterprise.

Nostalgia ain't what it used to be, according to both young and old musicians in S.A. Crary's "Kill Your Idols." Niftily edited docu reps a look back at Gotham's early-'80s No Wave scene, recollected by such key performers as Lydia Lunch, Sonic Youth and Swans, followed by a snapshot of their heirs, the latest crop of hip young bands including the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, A.R.E. Weapons and Gogol Bordello. Pic doesn't have the crossover appeal of recent music-themed docus like "Metallica: Some Kind of Monster," but could find worshippers as a micro-niche release.
Original interviews by the outspoken No Wavers, still full of piss and vinegar, are supplemented by vintage concert footage shot by Richard Kern and others. "We were just trying to be monsters," says Suicide's Martin Rev, remembering the time's dissonant vibe. Younger artists featured come across as less politically engaged or savvy, apart from the articulate Eugene Hutz of Gogol Bordello. The oldies diss the youngsters; the youngsters diss each other; everyone disses the Strokes. Pic leaves a curiously sour aftertaste, though tech credits are polished.
Camera (color, DigiBeta), Crary. Oct. 24, 2004.  Running time: 75 MIN.

 


For two-thirds of its brief length, Scott Crary 's Kill Your Idols  is content to competently survey the past three decades of downtown avant-rock, from Suicide and the No Wave explosion through Sonic Youth  and the Swans all the way up to contemporary bands like the Yeah Yeah Yeahs  and the Liars. But after about 45 minutes, the movie turns into something more like Kill Your Bastard Children , with No Wavers like Lydia Lunch  opining vociferously against the current scene's fashion-conscious posing and fundamentally derivative nature ("what a pandering bunch of postpunk pop mama's boys"). While clearly not without merit, such complaints would be more interesting if we were allowed to know who  exactly was being ripped; instead, Kill Your Idols  pulls a few punches, tempering its respect for No Wave values like extremity and contentiousness with a more 2006 concern for not actually offending anyone in particular. The more sweeping "death of rock" pronouncements are rendered ridiculous by the inclusion among the interviewees of vital young artists like Eugene Hütz  of Gypsy-punkers Gogol Bordello , but DNA's Arto Lindsay  gets at the essence of what's changed over 25 years, noting sympathetically that "we didn't have a whole industry selling us back to ourselves."
