         Little movies about the radical self-reinvention of working-class underdogs have become as reliable a British export as Prince Harry damage control. You could say the factory layoff has become the Chekhov's gun of contemporary British cinema — if a plant closes in Act 1, the protagonist must be engaged in some sort of arts-related fabulousness by Act 3. A decadelong diet of this sort of thing and you'd be forgiven for thinking the collapse of industry is the best thing to happen to England since Cadbury Easter Eggs.
 
  That said, when they're good, they're peerlessly cozy and fun, if you like that sort of thing. I know I do, and the new Miramax movie "Kinky Boots" scratches the itch. A humanist parable about how to be a good person, live a good life and make gallons of lemonade when life suddenly hands you lemons, it's predictably delightful and delightfully predictable.
 


         






    "Kinky Boots" stars Joel Edgerton ("Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Sith") as Charlie Price, whose vague plans to go into marketing are thwarted when he inherits his ancestral shoe factory, and Chiwetel Ejiofor ("Dirty Pretty Things") as Lola, the drag queen who saves — and is saved by — him.
 
  Charlie was raised by his father to take over the shoe factory some day, and no sooner has he decamped to London with his go-get-'em fiancée, Nicola (Jemima Rooper), than dear old dad drops dead. Charlie and Nicola return to Northampton, where Charlie soon discovers that the company is on its last legs. It's that pesky globalism again. Price shoes were made to last a lifetime, and the influx of cheap Slovakian footwear is devouring their market share.
 
  Nicola has less than zero interest in remaining in Northhampton, but Charlie, who has been forced to lay off some of the company's workers, feels the tug of corporate conscience. As he is laying her off, a young employee named Lauren (Sarah-Jane Potts) shames Charlie into thinking creatively, exhorting him to go out and find his own niche. And that he does, in the form of a cross-dressing cabaret singer who has trouble finding a reliable high-heeled shoe.
 
  Ejiofor is resplendent as the tough and tender Lola, whose return to the boonies and catwalk triumph in Milan is as initially fraught and unexpectedly liberating as is Charlie's. The script by Geoff Deane and Tim Firth — which was based on a true story and ushered to the screen by "Calendar Girls" producers and veteran spotters of underdog second acts Nick Barton and Suzanne Mackie — is packed with tender insights and sassy one-liners. Told against a soundtrack of shoe-themed hits, including "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'," "Cha Cha Heels," and "In These Shoes," "Kinky Boots" may tell a familiar story, but it's a story (of tolerance, agency and hope) that bears repeating.
 
 'Kinky Boots'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for thematic material involving sexuality, and for language
 
 A Miramax Films release. Directed by Julian Jarrold. Written by Geoff Deane and Tim Firth. Director of photography Eigil Bryld. Editor Emma E. Hickox. Music Adrian Johnston.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 46 minutes.
 
 At selected theaters.   

Brits are so famous for resolve in the face of adversity that their upper lips are regularly awarded prizes for stiffness. But in recent decades, export-market customers for British movie comedies have begun demanding dramatic gestures much bigger than mere immovability of facial features to convey fortitude. And our friends across the pond have gone daft trying to satisfy a worldwide desire to see a reserved populace get plucky. Since the growing of marijuana, the playing of brass-band instruments, and the doffing of clothes have all previously been covered as responses to financial setback, Kinky Boots  offers the manufacture of footwear custom-designed for transvestites as a novel, titillating corporate response to economic downturn. The fact that this formulaically winsome movie, directed by British TV helmer Julian Jarrold, is based on product-line changes at a real Northamptonshire factory does little to freshen its approach.
The first aha! moment occurs when Charlie (Joel Edgerton, Uncle Owen from Star Wars: Episode III ), ambivalent heir to his late father's unglamorous and almost bankrupt factory, meets Lola (Inside Man 's Chiwetel Ejiofor, fulfilling the Great Actor requirement of doing serious drag), a brassy chanteuse in need of sturdy, sexy, man-size stiletto footwear. The second (and third, and fourth, and, alas, fifth) occurs as the podgy white factory employees learn tolerance, and even love, at the feet of a big black queen about as kinky as a tea biscuit.

 Lola (Chiwetel Ejiofor), the strapping hero/heroine of the silly, quasi-inspirational British comedy "Kinky Boots," is the very model of a modern movie drag queen. Flamboyantly confrontational but tenderhearted under her brass, Lola, a k a Simon, embodies a cross-dressing archetype that is sashaying ever closer to the center stage of pop mythology. She arrives just in time to be the 21st-century replacement for that poignant outcast from an earlier era, the whore with a heart of gold.  You may remember that good/bad girl from the days of Belle Watling in "Gone With the Wind." Cast out of respectable society, often redheaded, she was the designated truth teller and reality check in countless sudsy dramas. Living honestly if sinfully among the shamefaced hypocrites who made her a pariah, she forgave them all with a rueful, ironic smile, but still was often forced to pay for her sins by dying.  The drag queen, by contrast, usually triumphs. And in the flouting of taboos, the preening cross-dresser goes her forerunner one better. Her battle cry, "I'm more man than you'll ever be, and more woman than you'll ever get," is meant to strike fear into the hearts of her male persecutors. But having been the lifelong target of contempt and rejection, she has also developed compassion for those frightened, benighted fools.  In "Kinky Boots," the tale of a failing men's shoe factory in the dreary Midlands that saves itself from ruin with the drag queen's help, Lola's being black lends her an extra layer of alienation and insight into oppression, which automatically translates into an extra layer of nobility. In one scene, she deliberately loses an arm-wrestling competition with a bully to allow him to save face. That's what I call saintly.  The versatile Mr. Ejiofor ("Dirty Pretty Things," "Inside Man"), seizing his opportunity, gnaws on this meaty role like a ravenous dog. In his flashy but only partly convincing performance, a crucial ingredient is missing: genuine sexual provocation.    A drag entertainer and star of a cheesy London nightclub, Lola rattles on about sexiness and how her thigh-high red stiletto boots are "tubular sex." But aside from her street-corner strut, she never behaves seductively, nor is there even a hint of sex in her life. Because her flouting of convention doesn't extend beyond sartorial display, her brand of gender-bending subversion is almost reassuring. Isn't it all just an act? And boy, can she arm-wrestle!  "Kinky Boots" is the newest in a profitable line of British films, inspired by the success of "The Full Monty," that portray the awakening of working-class Britons from hidebound customs and prejudices into the brave new world of exhibitionism and narcissism. Produced by some of the same hands involved in "Calendar Girls," which was a hit internationally (but not in the United States), it feels like a product stamped on an assembly line.  Directed by Julian Jarrold, the film is said to be based on a true story. But that doesn't guarantee truthfulness. The facts, whatever they may be, have been beaten into a formulaic, feel-good movie, riddled with plot holes, that has the shape of a ready-made musical. Right down to its dizzy finale at a Milan fashion show taken over by drag queens, the movie practically shouts to be danced and sung on a stage.  The shoe factory's transformation begins after its reluctant new owner, Charlie Price (Joel Edgerton), visits London and happens to save Lola from being mugged. After seeing her perform (she sings "Whatever Lola Wants," what else?), he decides to convert his business into a niche-market bootery for cross-dressers and dominatrixes, with Lola as design consultant. After a couple of false starts, it works like a charm.  "Kinky Boots" doesn't ask you to believe a single detail of what's splashed across the screen. All it wants is to divert you for about 100 minutes and leave you with the glow of vicarious comradeship, as blue-collar blokes and drag queens pull together to save the day. Foot fetishists will drool.  "Kinky Boots" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some strong language and a scene of a mugging.

Beyond Beats and Rhymes: A Hip-Hop Head Weighs in on Manhood in Hip-Hop Culture

'Tis Autumn: The Search for Jackie Paris

Clear Cut: The Story of Philomath, Oregon

The Short Life Of Jose Antonio Gutierrez

The Ground Truth: After the Killing Ends

Unfolding Florence: The Many Lives of Florence Broadhurst

A London drag queen and a bunch of Midlands working stiffs find common ground and, uh, mutual respect in "Kinky Boots," a slick, cross-tracks Britcom whose stride is hampered by its desire not to offend. Buoyed by a star-making turn from Chiwetel Ejiofor as a transvestite hoofer who helps save an ailing shoe factory with a niche line in erotic women's boots for cross-dressers, pic could strut to warm B.O. with major marketing coin and a campaign principally targeting female auds. Film hits British runways Oct. 7, with Miramax releasing it Stateside early next year.
A London drag queen and a bunch of Midlands working stiffs find common ground and, uh, mutual respect in "Kinky Boots," a slick, cross-tracks Britcom whose stride is hampered by its desire not to offend. Buoyed by a star-making turn from Chiwetel Ejiofor as a transvestite hoofer who helps save an ailing shoe factory with a niche line in erotic women's boots for cross-dressers, pic could strut to warm B.O. with major marketing coin and a campaign principally targeting female auds. Film hits British runways Oct. 7, with Miramax releasing it Stateside early next year.

Reportedly inspired by a true story, film initially focuses on Charlie Price (Aussie thesp Joel Edgerton, with a flawless Midlands accent and mien), who inherits the Northampton family business when his dad (Robert Hugh) drops dead. But making men's classic brogues is the last thing Charlie and his whiney fiancee, Nicola (Jemima Rooper), want to do: He wants to study marketing down in London and she dreams of a new apartment there.
Charlie discovers the fusty factory is on the verge of bankruptcy, and is forced to pink slip 15 of the firm's loyal employees. However, one of them, Lauren (Sarah-Jane Potts, good), suggests that Charlie should start a new product line instead of just firing people -- a remark that waters a seed in Charlie's mind. He takes her down south to check out a drag act in London's Soho district.
Film takes a while to find its feet as the script untidily shuffles its protags back and forth between Northampton and London. In the first of several unbelievable plot contrivances, a drunken Charlie had tried, on an earlier trip to London, to rescue "Lola" (Ejiofor), from being beaten up in a back alley; he later discovered Lola did a drag act at a small club.
While the script clears its throat and maneuvers its characters into position, some momentum is maintained by a couple of glitzy cabaret numbers (including, natch, "Whatever Lola Wants"). Ejiofor, seemingly channeling British comedian Lenny Henry in his self-deprecating humor, makes a fine figure of a muscular woman, with a hunky voice to match. Thesp does all his own singing and brings a swagger to the part that signals the role isn't going to stray into any threatening areas for straight auds. (For starters, the whole issue of Lola's sexuality is barely broached.)
Film finally gets under way when Lola, who's agreed to design the boots but stay clear of Northampton, turns up (for no good reason) on Charlie's doorstep in full drag. Agreeing to stay on for five weeks (again, sans motivation) to help Charlie's people get the new line ready for a Milan fashion show (don't even ask), Lola makes everyone confront their prejudices as well as confronting a few insecurities of his own.
Though the movie scoots over the script's potholes with a breezy indifference, they do weaken the structure in the long run. It's difficult to become fully engaged in the friendship between Charlie and Lola as there's no possible reason why they should even be in the same town, let alone working together. And though Geoff Deane and Tim Firth's script toys with the idea of "what it is to be a man," it never strays far into such murky waters.
Still, the picture never drags. Full complement of standard subplots includes plenty of character color from the femme workforce. Switch to Milan in the final reels gives pic a visual boost, and an upbeat coda, set to "Yes Sir I Can Boogie," delivers the full monty.
Production values are high throughout, with working-class life in Northampton never looking so good, given the Miramax sheen. Widescreen photography by Eigil Bryld is rich-toned and well composed, and Adrian Johnston's score smoothly decorates the whole cake.
 Camera (Technicolor prints, widescreen), Eigil Bryld; editor, Emma E. Hickox; music, Adrian Johnston; music supervisor, Liz Gallacher; production designer, Alan Macdonald; art director, Phillip Elton; costume designer, Sammy Sheldon; hair/makeup designer, Trefor Proud; sound (Dolby Digital/SDDS/DTS Digital), Paul Davies, Tim Alban, Richard Davey; choreographer, Les Child; assistant director, Josh Robertson, casting, Gail Stevens. Reviewed at Edinburgh Film Festival (Gala), Aug. 21, 2005. Running time: 106 MIN.
 


 
 


 

Why are movies "inspired by a true story" always the most contrived? The new Kinky Boots  feels old, or at least vintage. The Full Monty  is the most obvious reference point for this tale of struggling British blue-collars entering the world of exotic dancing, but attentive viewers will recognize story beats and characters from loads of other comedies of the uplifting British variety. In this year's model, the last scion of a once prosperous British shoe dynasty (Joel Edgerton ) saves his factory by switching production from conservative oxfords to thigh-high stiletto-heeled boots after an inspirational meeting with cross-dressing cabaret singer Lola (Chiwetel Ejiofor ). Though Lola screams about designing "irresistible, tubular sex," Boots  is unforgivably tame; only foot fetishists (or possibly Imelda Marcos ) could get off on such desexualized, PG-13-rated fare. For a more provocative take on these issues, see John Waters 's Female Trouble , still the definitive statement about drag queens and cha-cha heels.
