Not since Luc Besson tracked circles around himself in the Paris Métro tunnels of Subway  has a director employed an urban catacomb transport system as exhaustively — or exhaustingly — as Nimród Antal does in Kontroll . A subway is a ready-made dystopian movie set, and Antal, shooting in the Budapest underground (the world's second oldest), can't get enough of the steel gray fluorescent maze, the ominous slow drop of the escalators. The audience, however, gets more than enough. Antal has assembled what may be the single most colorless group of mangy lowlifes I have ever seen — a pack of inspectors whose job it is to harass the passengers already on trains into showing their tickets. (It's efficiency like this that killed Eastern European communism.) Their principal activity, though, consists of not liking each other and declaring it with repetitive abrasiveness. The hooded phantom who keeps popping up to shove passengers onto the tracks is the only figure in Kontroll  with even a semblance of purpose.

imrod Antal's "Kontroll," filmed entirely in the Budapest subway system, one of the oldest in the world, begins with a disclaimer of sorts, delivered by a public transit official reading from a clipboard. Mr. Antal's request for access to the tunnels and stations underneath the city, this man says, were at first greeted with some apprehension, and he admits that the finished movie might not create a favorable impression of the subway or its employees. Still, he thinks it will be clear enough that the filmmaker's intentions were "symbolic." "Symbolic of what?" you may ask yourself, and chances are that by the time you surface from this nerve-jangling underground journey the question will still linger in the air. Like many modern allegories, "Kontroll," a tour de force of grime, fluorescence and destinationless velocity, is more concerned with atmosphere than meaning. Still, the chaotic world it surveys - a lawless realm that makes the title sound like a grim joke - is not entirely obscure or unfamiliar. The movie throws in its lot with a group of soulful, slovenly ticket inspectors, known as controllers, working stiffs whose function seems to be to serve as receptacles for the contempt of their fellow citizens. Identified by red-and-black armbands, they are not so much guardians of public order as embodiments of social absurdity. They look like bums, think of themselves as heroes and make their living where the sun doesn't shine. In place of a straightforward narrative, Mr. Antal cooks up a stew of genre conventions. Like intersecting subway lines, various plots trail off into the darkness. At times, when it examines the workaday routines of one particularly hapless group of inspectors - including a cynical, chainsmoking veteran; a gangly, unkempt narcoleptic; and an excitable rookie - "Kontroll" resembles a platoon picture or a police procedural. When its leader, a handsome fellow named Bulcsu (Sandor Csanyi), who left behind a promising aboveground career of some kind, meets a pretty young woman in a fuzzy bear costume, a whimsical romantic comedy seems to be blossoming amid the dirt and noise. But a sinister figure hurling passengers in front of oncoming trains suggests a serial killer movie, with Bulcsu in the dual role of chief detective and prime suspect. "Kontroll," which opens Friday after being shown today (at the Walter Reade Theater) and tomorrow (at the Museum of Modern Art) as part of the New Directors/New Films series, is both more and less than the sum of these parts. Mr. Antal is an exuberant stylist with a cranky sense of humor, but his aesthetic demonstrates more punk-rock bravura than postmodern glibness. Self-conscious as it is, "Kontroll," his first feature, also has a throb of raw, genuine life that distinguishes it from other recent examples of international provocateur cinema. The film noir and horror movie set pieces in "Kontroll" feel a bit perfunctory next to the loose, extended scenes of the inspectors trundling through train cars trying to cajole and bully reluctant riders into proving that they have paid the required fare. A ragged, hectic foot chase suggests that Mr. Antal may have a future making action movies, which would be fine as long as he doesn't clean up his act too much. In the end, in spite of Mr. Csanyi's hangdog charisma and the inspired clowning of his crew, the star of "Kontroll" is the Budapest subway itself, which comes to seem, if not exactly enchanted, then at least possessed of a scruffy, durable magic. It may be a symbol after all, of the ways that creaky, battered cities, by their simple day-to-day persistence, can become strange, mythic places, turning their scruffiest inhabitants into heroes. 'Kontroll' Written (in Hungarian, with English subtitles) and directed by Nimrod Antal; director of photography, Gyula Pados; edited by Istvan Kiraly; music by NEO; production designer, Balazs Hujber; produced by Tamas Hutlassa; released by ThinkFilm. Running time: 106 minutes. This film is rated R. Shown tonight at 6 and 8:45 p.m. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, and tomorrow at the MoMA Roy and Niuta  Titus 1 Theater, 11 West 53rd Street, Manhattan, as part of the 34th New Directors/New Films series of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the department of film and media of the Museum of Modern Art.
The most successful Magyar movie of the 21st century, Nimr Antal's Kontroll  is an energetic piece of pulp fiction that, still working with old-fashioned film stock and locations, constructs its allegorical Sin City of Dreadful Night in the depths of the Budapest  subway system.
A deadpan introduction proposes the American-born, Hungarian-trained Nimr Antal as a serious young director concerned with timeless issues of good and evil—which is to say, he's devoted to smartass humor, fond of callous violence, and tickled by the release of bodily fluids. Kontroll  begins with a doomed floozy, swilling bubbly from the bottle as she descends into the underground. Food is invariably dribbled, and there are several instances of on-screen puking. The hero, a subway controller named Bulcsú, whose thankless job is spot-checking passengers for valid tickets, wakes up on the station floor with a bloody nose—and continues to collect cuts, bruises, and facial welts throughout the movie.
The controllers operate in crews. Bulcsú belongs to a particularly scrofulous and ineffectual outfit, who amuse themselves with daredevil competitions as they dodge a menacing public. (Meanwhile, as a post -MTV  filmmaker, Antal  choreographs the frequent chases to modified metallisti  fodder and discovers visual gags such as the Metropolis -like "face" created by two round fans at top of a ventilation shaft.) No less than the sleaze bar in Sin City , the metro is a world of dangerous crazies. Feeble representatives of state authority, the beleaguered controllers regularly confront all manner of prankish punks, idiot tourists, belligerent bimbos, flirtatious homos, undercover cops, and miscellaneous wackos, notably a winsome young woman in a teddy bear suit.
The death toll has been rising underground. Are the jumpers being pushed? A cowled phantom haunts the platforms, although it may be only the tormented Bulcsú who sees this sinister who-he. Is the horror psychological or metaphysical? Anyone familiar with Carnival of Souls  will lock on to the aspiring allegory. Bulcsú never surfaces from the underworld. Neither does the movie—literally or figuratively.
