 Emmanuel Carrère's psychological mystery, "La Moustache," begins innocently enough, with a scene of domestic chatter that prepares you to bask in one of those sexy, bittersweet marital comedies that is a hallmark of sophisticated French cinema. Then, by degrees, it subverts those expectations to spiral down a rabbit hole of ambiguity and doubt.  Either its protagonist, Marc Thiriez (Vincent Lindon), a successful, happily married architect, is dangerously delusional, or he is the victim of an elaborate conspiracy to undermine his sanity. At one point you even wonder if "La Moustache" might be science fiction located in the kind of time warp that was a favorite destination of "The Twilight Zone."  But the film is neither a paranoid fantasy nor a futuristic fable. Reminiscent of a John Cheever story like "The Swimmer," it is a surreal reflection on perception, reality and memory, whose focus shifts as the film burrows ever more deeply into subterranean territory. No matter how serious it becomes, however, "La Moustache" never forsakes an underlying attitude of high-style playfulness that recalls Hitchcock's cat-and-mouse romantic thrillers. This screen adaptation of a novel by Mr. Carrère, a popular French author making his directorial debut, never lets you forget your manipulation by a storyteller with the mind of a trickster.  It all begins when Marc and his wife, Agnès (Emmanuelle Devos), are preparing to visit friends for dinner, and he casually asks her what she would think if he shaved off his mustache. When she replies that she likes it and can't imagine him without it, he goes ahead anyway and removes it. Shorn of facial hair, Marc is taken aback when Agnès seems not to notice the change, but he stays silent and waits for her to comment.  At dinner their hosts, Agnès's ex-boyfriend Serge (Mathieu Amalric) and his Russian wife, Nadia (Macha Polikarpova), also appear oblivious to the change. Serge shares a disturbing memory of Agnès's bad behavior years earlier during a weekend in the country. She denied that behavior then and even now brusquely refuses to admit what she did.  By now Marc assumes that everyone has conspired as a practical joke not to mention his change of appearance. But when the couple arrive  home, and he declares that it's time to stop the charade, his wife is baffled. She insists he never had a mustache.  Exploding in frustration, Marc plunders the garbage for his facial hair and locates a photo album of a recent trip to Bali in which snapshots show him mustachioed. Strangely, however, he doesn't force his wife to look at the pictures. His grip on reality appears more tenuous shortly after he plays back a telephone message from his father and mentions it to Agnès, who reminds him sharply that his father is dead.  "La Moustache" invokes visions of "Gaslight" and "Notorious" in a scene in which Marc, drugged by Agnès, struggles out of bed and flees home just in time to avoid being carted off to a mental hospital. Outside there is a deluge. As the rain streaks the windows of his taxi, the torrent seems to be washing away reality itself.  Marc impulsively jumps on a plane to Hong Kong, a city that, like Marc's life, feels suspended between two realities (in its case East and West). He spends an entire day on a ferry shuttling back and forth across the harbor over which the spiky skyline shimmers like a mirage through the mist.  At first "La Moustache" seems to be a darkly witty commentary on what we notice or don't notice about one another; we're so lulled by the predictable and the commonplace, it implies, that we fail to recognize change. Then it widens into a reflection on marriage and the notion that two people, no matter how intimately connected, inhabit separate worlds. An illusion of oneness requires each partner to overlook or deny the other's unknowable qualities.  This handsomely photographed fable is grounded in strong performances by Mr. Lindon and Ms. Devos, who are entirely convincing as a long-married, childless couple, whose relationship still has pockets of passion. "La Moustache" views events entirely through Marc's eyes. Agnès increasingly emerges as a headstrong, changeable enigma, not to be contradicted.  The film is likely to frustrate those who demand that a mystery be solved and wrapped up with tidy explanations. But its refusal to tie everything up in ribbons and bows is one of its strengths. Even after it finally exits the rabbit hole, and the Thiriezes find a tentative peace, unanswered questions and contradictions hover over their cozy rapprochement like anxious spirits.

When a man spontaneously shaves off the title occupant of his upper lip in "The Moustache," an apparent shift in the fabric of the universe results. Adapting his own 1986 novel, Emmanuel Carrere -- whose books "Class Trip" and "The Adversary" became Cannes Competition titles by Claude Miller and Nicole Garcia, respectively -- provides a feast of sustained tension as the man's wife and his closest friends deny that he ever had a moustache. Viewers who like their conclusions tidy may rebel, but those who relish outstanding perfs in the service of an intriguing idea will be entertained. 
Awash in unsettling, matter-of-fact contradictions that are deliciously open to interpretation, pic's tone is a bit like "Gaslight" meets Roman Polanski's "The Tenant."
Architect Marc (Vincent Lindon) and his wife Agnes (Emmanuelle Devos) live in a beautiful multi-level Paris house that's the height of classy contempo design. As they prepare to join friends (Mathieu Amalric, Macha Polikarpova) for dinner, Marc, on a whim, shaves off the moustache he's apparently worn his entire adult life. The process is filmed with ritualistic intensity: Marc is meticulous, capturing stray hairs in a porcelain dish, cleaning up the evidence of foam and facial debris like a conscientious chambermaid.
But Agnes doesn't notice the change. And, their friends don't comment on the radical alteration either. Is this some kind of group plot, some conspiracy of silence?
When Marc says it's time to halt the charade, Agnes hasn't the slightest idea what he's referring to. When he spells it out, she assures him he never had a moustache. Snapshots from a 2003 vacation would seem to settle the issue, but only increase the blossoming unease.
Helmer gets incredible mileage out of tale's deceptively simple catalyst. Pic -- told entirely from beleaguered protag's p.o.v. -- can be read as a deft riff on how men and women sometimes perceive the same situation differently; as a subjective glimpse of creeping paranoia; as a full-bore unraveling of one or more personalities; or as an ever-shifting buffet of all three approaches.
Lindon and Devos couldn't be better as the well-matched, well-to-do couple whose romantic partnership appears to be under fire from the gods of perception.
Lensing and editing render each development and each new clue crystal clear despite narrative's aggregate ambiguity. Rarely has the trippy maxim "Wherever you go -- there you are" been so well depicted. An insistent Philip Glass violin concerto is used to fine effect.

Another sweaty French capsule of domestic apocalypse—somebody coin a regional genre label, quick— Emmanuel Carrére 's La Moustache  begins with exactly the ridiculously mundane question that transforms the characters' lives into an electrocuted horror: Should I shave my mustache? Marc (Vincent Lindon ) asks as he's lathering up in the bath before a dinner party; "Never seen you without it," his wife, Agnés (Emmanuelle Devos ), shrugs. He does, hides his face coyly, and then the unthinkable happens—she says nothing. His friends at dinner do not notice, his co-workers the next day (at a storefront design firm) are mute. Every conversation is an affront, because it's a denial of the obvious. Agnés soon flips out—her husband never had  a mustache. At first, Marc thinks it's all an elaborate joke, then he wonders if he's having delusions, both of which are happier scenarios than the last stop on this existential rail line to nowhere: that Carrére's hero is in fact invisible, incorporeal, present but somehow irrelevant, a Kafkaesque "disappearance man."
The big shave, indeed. A Raymond Carver  tale nudged into everyday absurdism, La Moustache  is all the more chilling because the marriage's salvation is everyone's priority—Marc and Agnés quickly reach critical mass, their relationship increasingly fragile under the onslaught of cognitive dissonance. After Marc returns from a midnight dumpster dive to retrieve his lost shavings, they fall into a rhythm of "don't ask, don't tell." Marc cannot insist on winning his case—by holding her down and forcing her to look at their old, lip-fuzzy vacation pictures?—because then he wouldn't have a wife left. Come the eventual intervention and attempted sanatorium commitment, Marc lights out for the frontier, landing in Hong Kong (negotiating like a fallen alien just as he did at home) and getting more lost still.
Devos, she of the relentlessly fascinating Picasso  face, never wavers in her conviction, and Lindon, thick-faced but lipless, with a natural frown and the worried eyes of an old dog, is perfectly cast as an average semi-macho schmo caught in the ultimate pre-menopausal nightmare. Only the presence of disaffected children would've ramped Carrére's sweaty fable up toward the homunculus d.t.'s of It's a Wonderful Life 's penultimate act. As it is, the film's evocation of the perceptual chasm between husband and wife is sharp and wounding, suggesting even a collision of two parallel universes, their vectors crossing in one moment of toiletry nonchalance. Is it science fiction? A successful novelist and restrained actor's director, Carrére makes the transformation of a silly marital argument into a cosmic upheaval look easy, and profound as well.
