 With candor, sympathy and excellent cinematography, "La Petite Jerusalem" reflects on the bodies of two sisters in Sarcelles, a drab Parisian suburb called home by an enclave of Orthodox Jewish immigrants. Laura (Fanny Valette) leans toward the secular; she is skeptical, a student of philosophy and falling in love with a mustachioed Algerian named Djamel (Hedi Tillette de Clermont-Tonnerre). Mathilde (Elsa Zylberstein), her sister, is devout, but conflicted by dual fidelities to God and husband (Bruno Todeschini). The latter, sexually frustrated, is no longer faithful. Can faith be reconciled with foreplay?  The writer-director, Karin Albou, opens up the intimate physical and psychological spaces of these two strong women through a style indebted to the sophisticated impressionism of Claire Denis and Lucrecia Martel. Her camera prowls, nimble and alert, attentive to the heft and texture of things. Close attention is paid to sound design, physiognomy and the suggestive capacities of unpredictable edits.  For the first full hour, as we're guided inside privacies of culture and consciousness, Ms. Albou sustains her rich and gently intoxicating mode of storytelling, a feat all the more admirable in light of the overly schematic script. Yet it eventually becomes clear that she doesn't quite know who Djamel is, nor how to develop his relationship with Laura along profitable dramatic or thematic lines. The focus slackens as the narrative expands; restrained as it is, "La Petite Jerusalem" isn't quite small enough.

In "Little Jerusalem," a young Orthodox Jewish woman puts her faith in the Torah and the classic works of European philosophy until neither suffices in the face of sexual desire. Keenly thesped pic juggles big issues, frank contextual nudity, the matter-of-fact specter of anti-Semitism in contempo France, and more. Scripter-helmer Karin Albou's assured feature debut, which explores compound emotional disarray, will be a conversation starter for fests in search of new talent and a given for Jewish fests. 
Juxtaposing the most ancient of rituals with absolutely modern concerns, pic sharply portrays a low-income suburb outside Paris that, for most viewers, will be a visit to another planet.
Eighteen-year-old Laura (Fanny Valette) lives with her family in an impersonal concrete housing block in a neighborhood of Sarcelles nicknamed Little Jerusalem because of its substantial Jewish and Jewish immigrant population. Laura's widowed mother (Sonia Tahar) is a kindly but superstitious matriarch who was born and raised in Tunisia. Also living in the modest apartment are Laura's sister Mathilde (Elsa Zylberstein), her husband Ariel (Bruno Todeschini) and their four young children.
While Laura wears her long dark hair uncovered, Mathilde covers hers with an opaque snood at home and a wig in the outside world. Mathilde follows religious law to the letter; Laura is respectful of her heritage but near fanatical in her study of philosophy, sometimes staying up all night to read Kant.
When she's not studying or attending the university classes in central Paris, Laura has a job on the cleaning crew at the school where Mathilde teaches Hebrew to children. Djamel (Hedi Tillette de Clermont Tonnerre), an exiled Algerian Muslim, works the same shift.
Laura's reading and reflection have led her to conclude that romantic love is a harmful illusion that can only lead to a loss of personal freedom. But the way Djamel looks at her throws her intellectual and spiritual beliefs for a loop.
Centered on people of limited means, pic intelligently explores the ways in which the demands of a tightly knit religious community can be stifling or liberating depending on one's own temperament. Highlights include scenes at the ritual baths where an unnamed woman wonderfully played by Aurore Clement reminds sexually reserved Mathilde that God wants women to have a blast in the bedroom, assuring her that Jewish law is in favor of sexual pleasure -- within the confines of marriage.
In what is arguably her best performance since "Van Gogh," Zylberstein brings Mathilde to life with grace and fervor. As the smart and beautiful but tortured Laura, Valette winningly conveys a serious teen's search for answers.
Camera (color), Laurent Brunet; editor, Christiane Lack; music, Cyril Morin; production designer, Nicolas de Boiscuille; costume designer, Tania Shebabo Cohen; sound (Dolby), Jean-Francois Mabire, Steven Ghouti; casting, Maya Serrulla. Reviewed at Le Lincoln, Paris, May 4, 2005. (In Cannes Film Festival -- Critics Week.) Running time: 97 MIN.
 


La Petite Jérusalem   opens with a close-up on the inner thighs of its young heroine, Laura (Fanny Valette). Director Karin Albou  frequently returns to Laura's unclothed body—particularly her back—and then follows it up with a shot of the Torah. Laura, whose ever present pout might be annoying if it weren't so lovely, is in the throes of a spiritual crisis. Raised in a Jewish Orthodox family in Paris, she devotes herself to Kant, renouncing "primal urges" (later she rethinks her policy when she falls for a Muslim man). Her religious sister Mathilde also resists sex, but for different reasons—"God will be mad." Albou awkwardly annotates their confusion by cutting to classroom scenes in which Laura or her professor speculates on reason and romance. The film strains under the influence of too many philosophy texts, but Albou never dismisses the idea of religion altogether (even as Mom casts spells on the telephone). The sisters' search for God comes down to matters of logistics: They deal with the sublime questions by finding new friends, appeasing their mother, or being good in bed.
