Not many animals are more emotive than collies: those anxious eyes, the long face, that occasional humanoid smile. This is why Lassie is a legend. And Lassie , a franchise reboot more successful (to my eye) than Batman Begins , is about as good as a Lassie movie can be. Taking after the original 1940 novel, the film's set in pre-WWII Britain, and Lassie, sold because times are tough, must travel a picaresque 500 miles to return home to little Joe (Jonathan Mason). Maybe I'm a sucker for dogs, but my eyes welled up. Twice. Woof!

 Everything old is new again in “Lassie,” the latest film about the beloved pooch with the I.Q. of a grad student and the instincts of a boomerang. Blissfully restored to the time period and location of Eric Knight’s 1940 novel, “Lassie Come-Home” —originally filmed by MGM in 1943 — the movie sets us down in a Yorkshire mining village with World War II on the horizon and social inequality front and center.  Opening with a beautifully orchestrated sequence involving Lassie, a terrified fox and a mass of flapping laundry, the movie — the 11th Lassie film, by the producers’ count — establishes its working-class turf immediately as miners and their wives confront a pack of blue-blooded hunters. The class conflict continues when the Duke of Rudling (a twinkling Peter O’Toole) buys Lassie from Sam Carraclough (John Lynch), an impoverished miner struggling to feed his stoic wife, Sarah (Samantha Morton), and 9-year-old son, Joe (the adorable Jonathan Mason). For the remainder of the movie, Lassie will run, limp and crawl her way back to the family she loves, a journey that will require her to brave more than 500 miles of countryside and innumerable cameos by well-known British actors. You’ll be pleased to know there are no wells.  Elegantly directed by the veteran British filmmaker Charles Sturridge, best known for stiff-upper-lip fare like the television mini-series “Brideshead Revisited,” “Lassie” approaches its classic tale with old-fashioned charm and not a trace of satire. As Lassie is transported to the Duke’s summer estate in the Scottish Highlands, the movie’s theme of forced separation is doubly underlined by Sam’s heading off to war and the Duke’s granddaughter, Cilla (Hester Odgers), being packed off to boarding school. This last occasions a lovely, tart scene in the school dormitory in which a dismayed Cilla is faced with row upon row of miserably numbered cots. “Just like the army,” boasts the headmistress.  Moving easily from the breathtaking shores of Loch Ness to the busy streets of Glasgow and the hills of Northumberland (the movie was filmed in Scotland, Ireland and the Isle of Man), “Lassie” balances cruelty and tenderness, pathos and humor without ever losing sight of its youngest audience member. And whether cringing before the Duke’s vicious kennel man (Steve Pemberton) or performing alongside a traveling puppeteer (Peter Dinklage), this Lassie exhibits a repertory of facial expressions that would put Jim Carrey to shame. When little Joe — in a scene that perfectly evokes the British school system’s once-joyful embrace of corporal punishment — gets whacked on the wrist by a ruler-happy teacher, the sight of a sorrowful Lassie licking the welts is enough to bring even the most flint-hearted viewers to their knees.  Like the best kids’ movies, “Lassie” is exquisitely tuned to the way a child sees the world. The journey from England to Scotland seems to encompass several time zones, and a glimpse of Nessie aligns our shaggy heroine with the creatures of Celtic folklore. And though adults may take issue with the film’s ultimate capitulation to the power of patronage, tykes will just be happy that Lassie has come home once more to the multiplex where she belongs.  “Lassie” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has mild violence, a bit of cursing and one dead doggie.

The bitch is back, and this time, she's really coming home. No, it's not the long awaited fifth "Alien" movie, but the latest screen outing for the loveable femme pooch protagonist, met here returning to her Blighty roots in "Lassie." Competent journeyman writer-helmer Charles Sturridge ("Brideshead Revisited") and his overqualified thesp ensemble steer a steady course between dogged fidelity to Eric Knight's sentimental original novel and modern auds' need for a little humorous bite with the barking. Result is a well-bred if docile creature that will sniff out a steady supply of B.O. kibble and make many homes happy on ancillary. Pic opened in the U.K. last Friday.
At first a short story and then a 1938 tome for tykes, Knight's "Lassie Come Home" was initially adapted for the 1943 Roddy McDowall-Elizabeth Taylor-starrer of the same name, thus launching one of the first multi-platform franchises with further pics and a long-running TV series. Somewhere along the way, the heroic Rough Collie was transplanted to the States. This latest Anglo-Irish-French-U.S. co-production reinstates Knight's Yorkshire-Scotland setting and 1938 time-frame. 
Moreover, if it weren't for its widescreen lensing and recognizably 2005 cast, pic's lack of self-parody or visual effects (barring a brief and silly CGI cameo from the Loch Ness monster), stolid sincerity and steady four-footed pacing could make it pass as the one of the best family films of 1938.
Main mutt is first met in her home village saving a fox from hounds and red-coated toff hunters, the latter pack led by the Duke of Rudling (Peter O'Toole, looking a frail but still on delightfully feisty form). Rudling is determined to acquire Lassie for his granddaughter Cilla (Hester Odgers), but the pup belongs to the Carraclough family. 
However, when miner Sam Carraclough (John Lynch) gets laid off, he and wife Sarah (Samantha Morton) must sell Lassie, which breaks the heart of 9-year-old Joe (Jonathan Mason). 
Despite efforts of Rudling's villainous kennelman Eddie Hynes (Steve Pemberton) to make Lassie stay with them, she repeatedly escapes and goes back to Joe. With WWII approaching, Rudling takes Lassie and Cilla up to the very north of Scotland for safety, but with Cilla's help the collie busts out, beginning a 500-mile journey via Glasgow back to Yorkshire. 
Pic's midsection belly carries a bit too much fat with constant crosscutting between Cilla, who in mirror storyline gets sent off to boarding school; Joe, mooching around the village, and Lassie, whose has the most amusing adventures. Still, with a light touch, Sturridge's script conveys anxieties of late-Depression, pre-war times, and trots sympathetically between the various social classes and nationalities Lassie encounters.
Pic's line-up of supporting players is an embarrassment of riches: Edward Fox ("The Day of the Jackal") and Peter Greenaway-regular John Standing as cricket-loving gents; Gregor Fisher (classic Blighty TV's "Rab C. Nesbitt") as a dog catcher; Kelly Macdonald ("Gosford Park") as a passerby; Robert Hardy ("Harry Potter") as a judge; Nicholas Lyndhurst ("Only Fools and Horses") as a highwayman; and Peter Dinklange (The Station Agent"), as a traveling puppeteer.
 Sturridge's modest, efficient helming, honed on upmarket TV fare as well as "Where Angels Fear to Tread" and "A Handful of Dust," puts the perfs front and center, and supporting and main thesps alike repay him with canine-style loyalty. Lynch and Morton make the most of their economically written parts as Joe's put-upon parents, while underage actors Mason and Odgers are appealingly naturalistic. 
Onscreen credits are vague about who plays title's top dog, but if multiple mutts were used, casting ensures continuity, with kudos due to the animal trainers who get her, him or them -- without apparent CGI assistance -- to walk over the backs of sheep, leap high fences, and perform in puppet shows.
Rest of tech package is well assembled but unexceptional. Blighty's prop stores must have been nearly emptied to kit out abundant period sets. Credit-listed locations in Ireland, the Isle of Man and Scotland offer suitably impressive looking landscapes, although Glaswegian viewers might complain that only scant effort has been made to create a convincing facsimile of the Victorian-built city.

British writer-director Charles Sturridge  makes beautiful, stubbornly unhurried movies about the best and worst in human, animal, and even otherworldly nature. Set in World War II England, Sturridge's Lassie reaches back to the original 1943 movie and to Eric Knight 's 1940 novel about the famously determined collie's obstacle-ridden trek through the North Country to rejoin the bereft young master, whose down-on-their-luck parents were forced to sell his best friend to pay for food. Deploying a stellar cast to mine the evergreen potential of poker-faced British proletarian waifs (Jonathan Mason ), honest-to-God mums and dads (Samantha Morton  and John Lynch ), crusty old bluebloods (a happily mugging Peter O'Toole ), blustery retainers (a very good Steve Pemberton ), and kindly traveling players (Peter Dinklage ), Sturridge spins a warm but persuasively unsparing tale of war's multiple displacements and the redeeming power of loyalty and love. Lassie  puts its trust in kids to be grown up, and appeals honestly (minus the usual knowing winks) to grown-ups by returning them to a state of childlike wonderment.
