 Even when they’re walking uneven shoulder to shoulder and hitting their  professional marks note for note, Dustin Hoffman and Emma Thompson don’t make a lot of sense as a screen couple. But there’s something irresistible about watching two people fall in love, even in contrived, sniffle- and sometimes gag-inducing films like “Last Chance Harvey,” which means that when he looks at her and she looks at him, there’s a good chance that they won’t be the only ones in the theater falling for all the hokey lines and shy glances.  It takes a while for those bashful looks to start darting around in this film, largely because the writer and director Joel Hopkins initially keeps his two main characters apart in order to milk their respective loneliness for maximum pathos. The story opens with Harvey Shine (Mr. Hoffman), a frustrated jazz pianist who writes jingles for a living, struggling to hold onto his gig while en route to his daughter’s wedding in London. By the time he has landed and breezed past an airline employee who is trying to snare deplaned  passengers with a weary smile,  a clipboard and  a questionnaire, the movie has introduced the woman who will change his life: that conveniently situated clipboard wrangler, Kate (Ms. Thompson).  Harvey and Kate almost meet cute again when he exits a cab that she climbs into, a near-chance encounter that suggests that Mr. Hopkins wants to say something about fate or has watched the romantic comedy “Serendipity,” another story about passing ships.  After much cutting between Harvey and Kate’s lonely parallel lives, the rumpled American divorcé and starchy British singleton finally get some face time at a restaurant, where a spark ignites amid several glasses of booze and teasing chatter. They consequently set off on a peripatetic flirtation that takes them along the Thames and to his daughter’s wedding reception, where Harvey delivers a speech about love and forgiveness so shameless, fraudulent and maddeningly effective that I wanted to hurl a shoe at his head.  Instead, seduced by its two wily leads, I reluctantly gave in to this imperfect movie, despite the cornball dialogue, pedestrian filmmaking, some wincing physical comedy and Mr. Hoffman’s habit of trying to win the audience over by simply staring at the camera with a hapless deadpan that says: Look at me, I’m still cute as a button, still cute as Benjamin in   “The Graduate,” and I’m still kind of lost and still very much in need of your love. I have a habit of falling for Mr. Hoffman’s puppy dog look even if it’s now worn by a grizzled hound, though the actor, a well-practiced thief of scenes and entire movies, obviously takes very good care of himself, even when cast opposite a formidable opponent like Ms. Thompson.  She may not be as brazen as Mr. Hoffman, but Ms. Thompson can certainly make off with a scene with the stealth of a Riviera jewel thief, as she does in the romantic comedy “Love Actually,”  in which her character swallows her pride and stiffens her lip when she realizes that her beloved husband is a two-timing bum. She’s laden with a few similarly noble-masochist moments in “Last Chance Harvey,” which finds her trying to hold onto Kate’s pride even as the screenplay chips away at the character’s dignity. In one wincing sequence Kate ends up on an unlikely blind date with a younger man who quickly starts eyeballing a juicier prospect, a situation that seems strictly engineered for her maximum humiliation.  She may crinkle around the eyes now, but Ms. Thompson exudes such warmth and humor and basic human vitality that it’s hard to buy this Miss Lonely Hearts  act. (She invests her character with far more life than does Mr. Hopkins.) But she gives it a go, putting on the mask of a woman who, quietly beaten down by too many disappointments, has assumed the somewhat glazed aspect of polite resignation. Every so often that face crumples  and you see all of Kate’s thwarted desires and closely held hurts etched into every fissure. To watch this face fall apart against an onslaught of love, and to disintegrate along with it,  may make you feel like a first-class sucker, but sometimes even cardboard valentines have sharp arrows.  “Last Chance Harvey” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned).

There's never a doubt that the losers-at-love of British writer-director Joel Hopkins' "Last Chance Harvey" are on intersecting arcs, that they'll meet cute and stroll off into a sooty London sunset. But stars Dustin Hoffman and Emma Thompson (reunited after 2006's "Stranger Than Fiction") are so disarmingly charming that even the most treacly moments work an emotional magic. Auds may skew a bit older for the Overture Films release, but the hardest cases will be moved and tell their friends.
Some couples just look good together. Thompson and Hoffman look like an exclamation point walking a hedgehog. The physical incompatibility gives them added personality, but it also emphasizes the innate awkwardness that has found their characters alone at middle age.
Hoffman, walking around the margins of physical grace like an aerialist, is failing music-jingle writer Harvey Shine, who's in London for the wedding of his estranged daughter (Liane Balaban) and couldn't be more transparently unhappy with himself. It's in the way he moves, the way he makes us cringe. When he encounters his ex-wife (Kathy Baker), her husband (James Brolin) and the rest of their extended clan, he and the audience realize what an outsider to real life Harvey has become.
Not so Thompson's Kate Walker, a bookish, would-be writer with a needy mother (Eileen Atkins) and a job that involves polling passengers at Heathrow, many of whom are tired and rude. These include Harvey, whose arrival in London marks his and Kate's first near-collision; another occurs when a saddened, drunken Harvey gets out of a cab just as Kate gets in (it's a well-executed moment by Hopkins, even if you can't quite believe he's gone there).
When Harvey is told by daughter Susan that she's chosen her stepfather to walk her down the aisle, a crushed Harvey decides to cut his visit short and get back to his tenuous job in New York. But traffic holds him up, he misses his flight and his boss (Richard Schiff) fires him over the phone.
This leads to the pivotal scene: an airport bar, a few Johnny Walkers, a beautiful Kate reading a novel -- banter, smiling insults, less emotional reticence than a Nora Ephron movie. And we're off to the emotional races.
"Last Chance Harvey" looks terrific, thanks to John de Borman's lensing, and so does London, though Hopkins steers clear of most of the obvious landmarks (no Big Ben or London Eye). He tends to place Harvey and Kate in a younger, more upscale, more go-go city -- namely, one that symbolizes a life that might be leaving them behind.
A wedding and a blind date provide the perfect settings to illustrate their frustrated romantic selves: Harvey stumbles through his daughter's rehearsal dinner solo, ultimately looking like a fool; Kate goes out with a guy who doesn't have the grace to get rid of his friends when they join him and Kate at their table. Harvey and Kate are surrounded by humanity, but it's cruelly oblivious to them. They would be perfectly happy to be as self-absorbed as everyone around them; they just can't seem to do it. So they get absorbed in each other instead.
Hoffman makes the most of everything he's given in Hopkins' script, mining laughs from even the least obvious places. Thompson has a less obviously gratifying task -- imbuing Kate with pathos without pity -- and the actress maintains a lovable if occasionally bruised dignity throughout.
A subplot in which Kate's mother makes incessant phone calls to Kate, while spying on a neighbor she suspects of being serial killer, provides some needed levity; Atkins, as always, is superb. But the heart of the film is its love story, with two characters it's very easy to care about.
Production values are top-notch.


Can a heartwarming meet-cute as unambitious and overtly sentimental as Last Chance Harvey  be simply too nice to get beat up on by anyone other than the coldest of bastards? Perhaps it helps if you're in the third act of your life, just as neurotic White Plains  schlub Harvey (Dustin Hoffman ) is in the film's first: long-divorced, facing forced retirement by a younger generation of commercial jingle writers, and on his way to London to see his daughter get married—and be given away by her stepdad. If it couldn't be gleaned from their intercut lives of loneliness, Harvey's soulmate-to-be on the other side of the pond is Kate (Emma Thompson ), a Heathrow survey-giver with a disarming wit to shield her from every relationship's inevitable rejection. Place your bets on whether the crude, embarrassing American and the British momma's girl will smilingly spar, then bond over their shared broken dreams; hooray, everybody's rich! Besides being old pros who could elevate such schmaltz in their sleep, Hoffman and Thompson—despite the 20-plus years between them, and her graceful restraint in contrast to his creepy assertiveness—have a genuinely sweet chemistry, which is the exact and only reason to seek this one out. Clearly, it's not for anything writer-director Joel Hopkins  (Jump Tomorrow ) has wrought.
