I'm not generally a big fan of tribute concerts, but this is a glorious exception. Yes, there were moments I wished that Leonard Cohen himself, with that voice of darkest gravel, had shown up on stage to do some of his songs (he appears, backed by U2, for one studio-shot number). But the performers, who include Nick Cave, Rufus Wainwright, and a startling tremolo-voiced singer named Antony, get so possessed by the words and melodies they're singing that you're transported by the sheer drama of their passion for Cohen's music. In Leonard Cohen I'm Your Man , the concert is mixed with interviews with the 71-year-old Canadian singer-songwriter, and he's a charmingly self-deprecating raconteur. Lofty claims by Bono aside, you hardly need an English degree to hear the lyrical prose-poem beauty of songs like ''Everybody Knows'' or the great ''Hallelujah,'' and this movie has moments so gorgeous they brought me to tears.

 When Leonard Cohen speaks, the elevated cadences of language are strewn with poetic images so precisely articulated in a rumbling bass-baritone voice that they all but erase the distinction between his song lyrics and personal conversation. Each word is carefully chosen and pronounced with oratorical flourish. Even when his sepulchral drone isn't bending itself around a melody, its sound is musical.  Here is one sample of his conversational style, from Lian Lunson's wonderful documentary portrait, "Leonard Cohen: I'm Your Man." Reflecting on the inspiration for his song "The Traitor," he muses that it is about "failing or betraying some mission you were mandated to fulfill and being unable to fulfill it and then coming to understand that the real mandate was not to fulfill it but to stand guiltless in the predicament in which you found yourself."  If a strain of gallows humor didn't underlie many of Mr. Cohen's pronouncements, such observations might sound insufferably pretentious. But he continually undercuts his own solemnity. Here is he is on his own mystique as a silver-tongued Casanova: "My reputation as a ladies' man was a joke. It caused me to laugh bitterly the 10,000 nights I spent alone."  "Leonard Cohen: I'm Your Man" combines pieces of an extended interview with this Canadian singer-songwriter, poet and author, now 71, with a tribute concert organized by Hal Willner at the Sydney Opera House in January 2005. Titled "Came So Far for Beauty" (after a Cohen song), the event featured performances of many of Mr. Cohen's best-known songs by Nick Cave, Rufus Wainwright, Kate and Anna McGarrigle, Martha Wainwright and Antony (of Antony and the Johnsons), among others.  Some of the performers offer pungent personal comments. Mr. Cave recalls discovering Mr. Cohen's "Songs of Love and Hate" album while living in a remote Australian town and suddenly "feeling like the coolest person in the world because it separated me from everyone and everything I detested."  Bono and Edge from U2, who did not participate in the Sydney event, offer extravagant tributes and near the end of the film are shown accompanying Mr. Cohen in a New York club performance of "Tower of Song." Edge likens him to "the man coming down from the mountaintop with tablets of stone having been up there talking to the angels."  Bono observes, "As dark as he gets, you still sense that beauty is truth."  Mr. Wainwright, who performs more songs than any other guest, sings "Everybody Knows," "Chelsea Hotel No. 2" (Mr. Cohen's self-deprecating and indiscreet reminiscence of a sexual encounter with Janis Joplin), and "Hallelujah" (the Cohen song Mr. Wainwright and Jeff Buckley have made something of a downtown standard).  He locates the dark humor at the bottom of "Everybody Knows," a bleak prophecy about the end of the world as we know it. Backstage he recalls the first time he met Mr. Cohen, who was in his underwear, cooking soba noodles and feeding bits of sausage on a toothpick to revive a baby bird. It wasn't until Mr. Cohen disappeared and returned wearing an Armani suit, Mr. Wainwright said, that he realized he was in the presence of a legend.  Two of the other more memorable performances come from Antony, who cries out "If It Be Your Will" in an eerie, shivering falsetto, and Teddy Thompson (son of Richard and Linda), who stamps the more obscure Cohen song "Tonight Will Be Fine" with the concert's most intense vocal.  Reflecting on his life and work, Mr. Cohen recalls first encountering poetry in the Jewish liturgy at a synagogue. Some of his more recent recollections are of a purgative sojourn in a Zen monastery during the 1990's on Mount Baldy, where he studied with a Japanese Zen master.  But a Zen-like austerity has always been present in his writing. A Zen spirit also informs his modest self-assessment of his life's work.  "I had the title poet, and maybe I was one for a while," he says. "Also the title singer was kindly accorded me, even though I could barely carry a tune."  "Leonard Cohen: I'm Your Man" is  rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It contains some strong language.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

"Leonard Cohen I'm Your Man" proves that few can maneuver one of Cohen's dusky, lovelorn songs like Cohen himself. Artfully intercutting a wide-ranging interview with the Canadian songwriter and a highly erratic tribute show lensed live at the Sydney Opera House, pic is essential material for fans, but far less effective as a draw for new, younger listeners. Lions Gate plans a 2006 theatrical release, but the real love will be felt in vid.
As long as Cohen is speaking to director Lian Lunson's camera about his life as a Montreal poet, his rise to hipster fame in Gotham and his eventual retreat from recording and touring to a Zen monastery on Mt. Baldy, pic serves as a nice auto-portrait. But cutaways to the Sydney show inconsistently serve Cohen's art, especially with Nick Cave's stilted Vegas-type crooning. Rufus Wainwright and Antony tap into the marrow of such tunes as "If It Be Your Will." Cohen finally appears at the end with "Tower of Song," in good form with U2 at a N.Y. club, but there's little mention of his reasons for a return to recording and poetry writing.
 Camera (color/B&W, DV), Geoff Hall (Sydney), Lunson, Brit Marling, John Pirozzi (New York); editor, Mike Cahill; music, Leonard Cohen; music producer, Hal Willner; musical director, Steven Bernstein; sound (Dolby Digital), Graham Wyse, Rob Schreiber, Marc Malouf; second unit camera, Marling (Sydney), Cahill (New York). Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Real to Reel), Sept. 11, 2005. Running time: 105 MIN.

 


 
 


 

Always loving but at times soporific, these renditions range from a dull Beth Orton version of "Sisters of Mercy" to an unironically anthemic "Anthem" by Julie Christensen and Perla Batalla. Kate and Anna McGarrigle can usually be counted on for loopy banter, but aside from breezy-bitchy Rufus Wainwright, who also delivers a musical highlight with "Chelsea Hotel
2," the chatty levity is left to the sly and spry old rumbler himself. Oddly, director Lian Lunson sabotages even Cohen's bits with ominous whooshes and psycho-synth tones. Cohen so doesn't need to be edged toward eerie. He projects creepy poet poon-hound Dionysian-Buddhist tricksiness all by himself. These spooky sonics skew Cohen's engaging account of his years spent in seclusion as an ordained Mt. Baldy monk.
Longtime fans won't need the Edge's Moses comparisons to convince them that Cohen is indeed their man. And for newcomers, full performances from Sydney might make a better introduction than Nick Cave saying the usual stuff about Songs of Love and Hate  making his teenage self feel cool. Performance-wise, Antony's withering "If It Be Your Will" simply kills, though Willner might have squashed the distracting background vocals. Teddy Thompson proves again that while he carries a pretty tune, he didn't inherit his parents' compelling vocal serration. Martha Wainwright does "The Traitor" justice, even if Rufus still petulantly skirts the key rhyme in his oft performed cover of "Hallelujah." But as you might suspect, with U2 behind him in a tight cabaret, Cohen, his sad eyes dancing and his growl coyly teasing, dusts 'em all with the graveyard smash "Tower of Song."
