
Frankly, the prospect of a movie starring Marlon Wayans as a 36-inch-tall ex-con pretending to be a toddler did not excite me, but the film's enthusiasm for the lowest imaginable humor and Marlon's seemingly boundless skill at bringing it off are contagious. (His head has been digitally snapped on the lively little bodies of Linden Porco and Gabriel Pimental.) Everybody looks like they're having fun in ``Little Man," another inane outing from the Wayans brothers. And with some ineptly made comedies, that's good enough.
I laughed at the Wayanses' movie, and I don't even hate myself for it. The truth about the family's brand of comedy -- Keenen Ivory directs, Marlon and Shawn act, and all three usually write the script -- is that they like their audiences. We're not insulted, and we're not pandered to either. One major surprise in ``Little Man" is how it quietly takes up the cause of proud black paternity -- Shawn plays the guy eager to adopt Marlon's impostor baby -- without saying, ``Look, we're taking up the cause of proud black paternity!" A heart beats beneath the obligatory collection of breast-milk spit takes, toys to the groin, and urine and flatulence gags.
When Marlon's 3-foot thug, Calvin, steals a huge diamond that ends up in a handbag carried by Kerry Washington, he acts like the child she and her fiancé, Darryl (Shawn), sort of want. She's an upwardly mobile career woman; he's ostensibly careerless -- and broke, too. (The pitiful engagement ring he gives her has a vacant setting.) When Calvin arrives, dropped off by the uniquely funny Tracy Morgan, as Calvin's vividly stupid right-hand man, they can't help falling in love with him. Washington is especially good at registering baby Calvin's freakish qualities (that tattoo, that shank wound, those muscles!), then forgetting about them in the very next scene. That's bad moviemaking. But it could also just be pure love.
With the Wayans es , it's hard to tell the difference. 2000's ``Scary Movie" was as close to a masterpiece as bad filmmaking is likely to come. Ugly and haphazard as it was (Keenen Ivory's style is ruthlessly point-and-shoot), the original ``Scary Movie" was part Mad magazine spoof, part acute social bulletin: the best film ever made about black people experiencing popular culture. There was nothing haphazard about its sense of perception -- the Wayanses knew how to tell a joke. (They dumbed the movies up.) ``White Chicks," from 2003, should have been even better, but the gags never rose to the level of the conceit -- Marlon and Shawn dismantle ``white culture" by going undercover as Beverly Hills ditzes. ``Little Man" is superior to ``White Chicks" because it's not really going for anything. It's brazenly mindless farce.
The brothers get antic support from Molly Shannon and Alex Borstein, from Wayans regulars Lochlyn Munro and Brittany Daniel, as a 'roid-raging dad and his bodacious wife, and from ``In Living Color" vets Kelly Coffield Park and David Alan Grier. Playing Washington's Calvin-suspicious father, the expertly grizzled John Witherspoon, in his least crass film role, steals the movie. But the Wayans es are disarmingly egoless comedians. They want everybody in their films to be funnier than they are.


         If seeing a guy get whacked in the privates doesn't make you laugh the first time, maybe it will the fourth, or the 24th time. In the off-putting, live-action cartoon "Little Man," the latest offering from the brothers Wayans, it's a fairly obvious gag to belabor, what with Marlon Wayans rendered, through the magic of cinematic deception, as a 2-foot, 6-inch Mini-Me, but obviousness is an ongoing theme here.
 
 The Wayans brothers make high-concept, lowbrow comedies that pretty much defy review. While sometimes entering areas that might encourage satire or a point of view, they prefer to defiantly wield their humor like a blunt instrument, pummeling the audience with repetition in the hope that something sticks. In this case, the jokes rarely do.
 


         






   If you've seen the trailer for "Little Man," you know the gimmick. Marlon Wayans plays a criminal dwarf posing as a baby in order to retrieve a diamond he stole with his lunkheaded rap mogul-wannabe partner (Tracy Morgan). Brother Shawn Wayans plays a gullible man who desperately wants to be a father over the objections of his career-minded wife (Kerry Washington). Put the two together and you get a labored, extended gag reel that mines the neutered, PG-13 comedy that has become the brothers' stock in trade. The screenplay, written by Marlon and Shawn with director brother Keenen Ivory Wayans, is devoid of verbal wit, instead relying on a relentless stream of Looney Tunes-inspired violence.
 
 *
 
 "Little Man,"
 rated PG-13 for crude and sexual humor throughout, language and brief drug references. Running time: 1 hour, 37 minutes. In general release.
   

 Special effects transform Marlon Wayans into a belligerent midget jewel thief in “Little Man,” but it’s the people behind the camera — the guys who brought you “White Chicks,” as the trailer hideously forebodes — who are responsible for the depressing infantilism.  After nabbing a diamond the size of his fist, Calvin, the thief on the lam, stashes it with a pair of unsuspecting yuppies (Kerry Washington and Shawn Wayans). The plot revolves around his attempts to retrieve it by masquerading as a freakish orphan left on their doorstep, while mostly serving as a pretext for the crotch-level protagonist to abuse men’s testicles and sexually molest women.  Somewhere within all the crude slapstick and crass stereotypes, “Little Man” operates as a vulgar burlesque on the crisis of African-American manhood, particularly the relationships, or lack thereof, between fathers and sons. Not that the Wayans brothers are conscious of anything more than the fortune to be had from defecation set pieces and gay-panic jokes.  Better filmmakers would mine the disreputable vein of humor in the movie’s slyest joke: a black and white police duo discussing the skin color of suspects in terms of the Starbucks drink it most resembles. A more characteristic scene, and one that nicely summarizes what’s in store for the ticket holder, has a dog empty its bladder all over Marlon Wayans’s face.  “Little Man” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Dirty-minded, foulmouthed and covered in excrement.

There are probably some moviegoers who can laugh at the sight of a groin-punching, breast-grabbing baby, possibly even find it cute. Everyone else should steer clear of "Little Man," which welds Marlon Wayans' head to a diminutive body double, offering up the creepiest bigscreen dwarf since the last David Lynch movie. Not without its share of inspired crudities, this vulgar, violent comedy should provide decent counterprogramming during a blockbuster-heavy frame, drawing the usual overlap of urban audiences and Wayans brothers devotees.
The brothers' work on the "Scary Movie" franchise notwithstanding, "Little Man" may just be their scariest movie yet, with credit going entirely to its mesmerizingly freaky title character. Played by Marlon, whose head has been digitally grafted onto the body of 9-year-old thesp Linden Porco (Gabe Pimental is also credited as a double), Calvin is a hardened thug who stands exactly two-foot-six in height (a cousin, perhaps, of Tony Cox's pint-sized burglar in "Bad Santa").
Fresh out of prison, Calvin teams up with his hapless accomplice Percy (Tracy Morgan) to steal a diamond from a jewelry store. In the course of their clumsy getaway, the gem winds up in the possession of an unsuspecting married couple, Darryl (Shawn Wayans) and Vanessa (the appealing Kerry Washington).
Darryl is eager to start a family with his wife, and Calvin, thinking quickly (which is to say, not at all), dresses himself up as a baby and has Percy leave him in a basket on the couple's doorstep. Confused yet touched, Darryl and Vanessa decide to keep the foundling until they can get in touch with social services.
This immediately strains credibility, as the only plausible reaction to Calvin's monstrously un-babylike appearance -- as a result of some obvious visual effects work, Wayans' face looks too big even as his head looks too small -- is to laugh or recoil. (He's about as convincing as the white chicks in "White Chicks," the Wayanses' previous feature.) As the "Baby Geniuses" pics have firmly established, there's nothing remotely charming about the sight of tots talking, fighting or otherwise behaving like mini-adults, and "Little Man" takes the conceit to hideous extremes.
The film at least seems aware of how grotesque its central creation is, as evidenced by the reactions of Vanessa's cranky, instantly suspicious dad (John Witherspoon), as well as Darryl and Vanessa's friends -- played by Alex Borstein, Fred Stoller, Brittany Daniel and Lochlyn Munro -- who are barely able to conceal their revulsion. But not even Calvin's tattoo, his knife scar or his very active libido convince his besotted new parents that something is wrong with their little bundle of joy.
Helmed by Keenen Ivory Wayans from a script he wrote with brothers Marlon and Shawn, the comedy hinges on Calvin being subjected to every possible indignity while also enjoying the benefits of his pampered new lifestyle. The recurring comic motif is sexual humiliation, with Calvin serving as both unwilling recipient (he's probed by a rectal thermometer) and horny assailant (he gropes a woman bouncing him up and down in her lap). At one point, he crawls into bed with Ma-ma and Da-da, in a skin-crawling scene that invites the viewer to laugh at what amounts to a rape.
Mostly, though, the pic falls back far too often on Calvin's propensity for violence, specifically his habit of punching those body parts within his reach. Brutal slapstick reaches an unfunny climax when a stereotypical Italian mobster (Chazz Palminteri) and his cronies force their way into Darryl's home in search of the diamond, resulting in scenes that play like a wisely discarded alternate version of "Home Alone."
Marlon Wayans accessorizes his weirdly committed performance as baby Calvin -- all bug-eyed, lip-jutting facial expressions and nauseating goo-goo-gah-gahs -- with an impressively embarrassing wardrobe of bonnets, bibs, beanies and booties courtesy of costume designer Jori Woodman.
Some additional levity is provided by the brief, isolated appearances of Molly Shannon and Rob Schneider (both "Saturday Night Live" alums, along with Morgan). Also worthy of mention is the sound design, which contains one of the most gurgly and grotesque renderings of gastrointestinal distress ever captured.
