Occasionally, if you walk into a movie late, what's happening on screen can look more dramatic and intriguing than if you'd seen it from the beginning. Forced to watch the characters without the usual labels (neighbor, lover, boss), you may, for a moment or two, close in on something about them — a gesture, a laugh — that's truer to the exploratory nature of movies than if you'd already had their roles neatly pegged.
I didn't arrive late at Little Fish , but it's that intimate dislocation that Australian director Rowan Woods achieves. He sets up scenes that are supple, accomplished, and utterly absorbing yet leave the audience with lingering questions that only heighten our involvement. Why does Cate Blanchett, submerged in a swimming pool, look like she wishes she could stay there, and why is she working at an Asian video store? And what's going on when Blanchett, in party-girl mode, sprawls on a couch, looking sexy and happy for the first time, as Hugo Weaving, with overly bright eyes and a goatee shaggy enough to house a colony of flies, does a dissolute dance of mock seduction?
The film isn't being cryptic for the sake of it. Woods spends a good 45 minutes setting up an Altmanesque mosaic of characters, letting us assemble their relationships one puzzle piece at a time. But that's because he's showing us how these folks present themselves to each other. Little Fish, set in the Sydney suburbs, is a tale of addicts and former addicts: people either caught in the grip of heroin or trying to escape its pull. Some, like Blanchett's 32-year-old Tracy, desperate to launch her own business, have been clean for several years, but Little Fish  (the title refers to tiny fish-shaped packets of liquid smack) is less about the cruddy rituals of scoring and shooting up than it is about the junkie's mode of being, his dependence on secrecy and lying, which can linger long after the habit has been kicked.
The moment that Tracy fibs about being okayed for a bank loan, we know she's still caught in the drug spiral. Lionel (Weaving), her party comrade, is a retired soccer hero who turned her on to heroin and is still in its thrall, and Brad ''The Jockey'' Thompson (Sam Neill), his supplier and former lover, is a criminal kingpin who spreads rot wherever he goes. It's a shock to see Neill, in a leisure suit and comb-over, play a lethal slime, and he's great at it. Completing the circle of sleaze is Tracy's brother (Martin Henderson), who lost his leg in a mysterious accident, and her former flame/dope partner, a Vietnamese Australian named Jonny (Dustin Nguyen), who has just returned to Sydney to work as a stockbroker. He seems the sleekest of straight arrows — which in this film means look out. Little Fish  unfolds as an urgent sprawl of fractured hopes and casual deception. The actors are terrific, especially Weaving, who plays bottoming out as a tragedy spiked with gallows humor, and Blanchett, who digs deep into the booby-trapped nature of recovery. The revelation, however, is Rowan Woods, a major filmmaker in the making.

 To sink or to swim: that is the question. In "Little Fish," Cate Blanchett does both. The great Australian actress sinks into the role Tracy Heart, a 32-year-old recovering drug addict who manages a video store in Cabramatta, a Sydney    suburb  nicknamed Little Saigon for its large Vietnamese population and known as the heroin capital of Australia. As in all her screen performances, Ms. Blanchett immerses herself completely in her character, a damaged, high-strung woman determined to live the straight life while surrounded by temptation.  Recurrent scenes that push the sink-or-swim metaphor too insistently show Tracy doing laps in a pool, treading water and dunking and bobbing to the surface, anxious, watchful, impatient to get on with her life. Will she stay off drugs? To its credit, the thorny, compelling drama, directed by Rowan Woods from a screenplay by Jacquelin Perske, is more concerned with examining the conflicted, complicated relationships among its characters than with exploiting the will-she-or-won't-she aspect of Tracy's perilous situation.  If "Little Fish" is considerably more upbeat than Mr. Woods's last film, "The Boys," a harrowing study of a man's return from prison to a nightmarish family of surly deadbeats, its view of the world is still unsentimental,  bordering on acrid. And the film's bleached-out color reflects its parched emotional atmosphere. The hyperrealistic screenplay sketches Tracy's family relationships in an elliptical style that pointedly omits neat explanations in underlined sentences; you have to read between the lines.  Tracy's road to self-fulfillment is paved with setbacks. Because of her record of credit-card fraud during her druggie days, her applications for a bank loan to buy and expand the video store are bluntly rejected. And although four years have passed since Tracy went clean, she is surrounded by physical and emotional wreckage from the bad old days.  Four years earlier, Tracy's brother Ray (Martin Henderson) lost part of a leg in a car crash in a vehicle driven by her ex-boyfriend Jonny Nguyen (Dustin Nguyen), a slick, seductive dealer and user who returns from a four-year exile in Vancouver claiming to have cleaned up his act and landed a job as a stockbroker for a Sydney bank. Emotional alarms go off when he drops in on Tracy, who lives with her fiercely protective single mother, Janelle (Noni Hazlehurst). But the old romantic spark between them reignites, and against her better judgment Tracy sleeps with Jonny.  Tracy also refuses to break her ties to Lionel Dawson (Hugo Weaving), a former Australian football star and family friend who introduced her to heroin and who is still using.  Lionel, the gay ex-lover of the local drug kingpin, Brad Thompson (Sam Neill),  supports his habit by selling sports memorabilia out of his crummy little house. But he is thrown into panic by Brad's brusque announcement of his retirement from the drug business.  If Mr. Neill's cold, efficient drug lord is diametrically opposed to the cliché movie image of a strutting, bling-flashing sadist, the character's dead-eyed indifference to anything but business is just as sinister in its understated way.  Turned away by Brad, Lionel attempts to go cold turkey but breaks down and pleads with Tracy to score some heroin. She reluctantly agrees, making the connection at the train station, where for a scary moment she considers using again.  In his portrayal of a burnt-out athlete on the skids who summons the remnants of his charm to go after what he wants, Mr. Weaving doesn't shy away from embodying a man wallowing in shame and self-degradation. Near the end, "Little Fish" becomes a melodrama involving Brad and his slippery assistant, Steven Moss (Joel Tobeck), who has stolen enough money from his boss to move with his wife into a flashy suburban house. Appended to the movie, this ugly little story culminates in a bloody midnight showdown at a  speed factory. If it doesn't quite belong with the rest of the film, it helps tie up some loose plot ends. It also reinforces the movie's  dry-eyed assessment of heroin and its stranglehold on people  who stay in its vicinity, even after they've stopped using.  "Little Fish" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations, mild violence and scenes of drug taking.
An Aussie addiction drama with a splash of crime thriller thrown in, Little Fish  boasts strong performances from the Southern Continent's acting A-list. Cate Blanchett  is characteristically mesmerizing as Tracy, a thirtysomething video store clerk trying to escape her junkie rap sheet and a lousy credit rating. Veering from girlishly awkward to nervy and haggard, Tracy works hard and lives with her mum, checking out occasionally to meditate in the aquamarine depths of a swimming pool. A sweaty and decidedly un-elfin Hugo Weaving  plays Lionel, an aging ex-footballer who, years ago, gave Tracy her first taste of heroin (though they remain pals). When an ex-boyfriend from her druggie past turns up, Tracy struggles to hold her head above water, while keeping the moribund Lionel out of the grips of a local druglord (played by a jowly Sam Neill ). Jumbled and lurid as this sounds, Jacqueline Perske 's script makes room for each character. And while Little Fish takes a turn for the generic in its final act, solid acting, an atmospheric soundtrack, and flare-filled cinematography more beautiful than an Apple  screensaver are enough to keep the film afloat.
