Lonesome Jim  can claim the dubious achievement of proving Leo Tolstoy's most famous adage wrong: Each unhappy family is not necessarily unhappy in its own way. Sometimes, an unhappy family is a collection of glass-nearly-empty types whose miseries, while acute, are so vaguely defined as to be indistinguishable from simple indigestion to anyone other than the sufferer. All too often, they're the creation of a novice indie writer or director who feels such intense personal identification with his fictions of alienation that he forgets to convince the viewer why compassion is called for.
Clearly, for instance, something is troubling the title Jim (Casey Affleck, speaking in a sad sack's monotone) in this mouse-brown specimen of a 2005 Sundance entry. Because he couldn't ''make it'' in New York (completing a Sundance screenplay? writing gags for The Onion ?), Jim has taken the bus back to his claustrophobic family home in rural Indiana, where he's greeted by a suicidally depressed brother (Kevin Corrigan). Dad (Seymour Cassel) is an angry, taciturn owner of a small factory. Mom (Mary Kay Place) is a suffocatingly trite chatterer who treats her sons as if they were boys with runny noses rather than men with death wishes. The factory, where Jim is put to work, is photographed with all the widget gloom of the doll plant in Steven Soderbergh's moody drama Bubble, but none of Soderbergh's wise eye for composition.
There's nothing for Jim to do but sulk in a local bar on the corner of Nowheresville and Stuckforlife. And that's where he meets Anika (Liv Tyler), a nurse as improbably pretty and available as she is attracted to Jim's brand of emotional catatonia. Maybe life in Blowyourbrainsout, Ind., isn't so bad after all.
Lonesome Jim  was directed by the talented actor Steve Buscemi, who made a fine directorial debut in 1996 with the small-scale mood piece Trees Lounge , but who is stymied here by the inertia of his material. The screenplay is a debut for James C. Strouse, who set the story in his hometown of Goshen, Ind., heck, in his parents' real factory. Whether Anika represents wish or autobiographical reality is a topic for bar debate among anyone with emotional energy left to lift a beer bottle.

 The 27-year-old protagonist of Steve Buscemi's deadpan comedy "Lonesome Jim" lives out the worst nightmare of every bushy-tailed go-getter who moves to New York to Be Somebody (in his case, a writer) and fails miserably. After eking out a living as a dog walker, Jim (Casey Affleck) skulks back to his parents' home in rural Indiana with no idea of what to do next. As Robert Frost observed, "Home is the place where, when you have to go there, they have to take you in."  In describing "Lonesome Jim," I use the term comedy advisedly, since the subject of the movie is depression, and the movie's sense of humor is only as broad as the Mona Lisa's smile. As for Indiana, the self-described "crossroads of America," I doubt there is a chamber of commerce in the entire Hoosier State that would endorse this portrait of it as the country's capital of boredom and despair.  "Lonesome Jim," written by James C. Strouse, is the third feature film directed by Mr. Buscemi, whose 1996 movie, "Trees Lounge," depicted a similar state of ennui gripping a town  in suburban Long Island. Mr. Buscemi also wrote and starred in that small gem of a movie, which had more psychological nuance than this emotionally cauterized slice of minimalist malaise.  While Jim's robotically perky mother, Sally (Mary Kay Place), makes a fuss over him, his father, Don (Seymour Cassel), greets him with a wary scowl. His deadbeat older brother,  Tim (Kevin Corrigan), a divorced father of two young girls who lives at home at 34, is so consumed by disappointment that he barely acknowledges Jim's return. When the brothers finally compare notes, Jim sweetly observes that he may be a mess but that Tim is a disaster.   Tim responds by deliberately  slamming his car into a tree and nearly dies.  Video: Movie Minutes Stephen Holden reviews Steve Buscemi's "Lonesome Jim," a deadpan comedy about a depressed writer who returns in defeat to his parents' home in rural Indiana.  Jim's father pressures him to work on the assembly line in  the family's ladder factory, and before long,  he gives in. There he meets Stacy, a k a Evil (Mark Boone Junior), a scruffy, motorcycle-driving drug dealer and the only character in the movie who hasn't fully succumbed to  lethargy.  Jim also hooks up with Anika (Liv Tyler, slightly more expressive than usual), a good-hearted nurse and the divorced mother of a smart young boy. Although their first sexual encounter is consummated in less than five seconds, Anika doesn't seem to mind much and returns for more.  "Lonesome Jim" would be a stronger movie if Mr. Affleck had the wherewithal to bare more of the passive-aggressive rage inside a character who contemplates the world with a hangdog, poker-faced stare and drones his dialogue in a neutral monotone.  That attitude  is  convincingly struck,   but a more resourceful actor would have used  this blank slate to scrawl a thousand telling details about the feelings percolating below the surface.  "Lonesome Jim" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations and strong language.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

Penned by little-known Midwestern writer James C. Strouse, "Lonesome Jim" is a seriocomedy starring Casey Affleck as a rudderless young man returned to his boring native Indiana burg. Probably the lowest-key feature yet directed by low-key thesp Steve Buscemi, pic sports the same dry, off-center humor, characterful humanity, and deft grasp of milieu that marked "Trees Lounge" and "Animal Factory." But while those underseen efforts quietly built up to considerable impact, there's a slightness to the mildly eccentric material here that leaves the whole enterprise in danger of fluttering away. Cable and rental exposure looks likelier than hardtop play.
Back after a couple of barely communicado years in Manhattan -- where he'll only say he worked as a dog-walker -- 27-year-old Jim (Affleck) lands on his parents' doorstep with a thud and a whimper. Clearly the terribly sensitive (read: sulky) aspiring writer did not find success in the Big Apple. But Jim's whole personality seems built on self-pity and self-fulfilling prophecies of failure.
Nonetheless, mom Sally (Mary Kay Place) expresses delight at his surprise return. Dad Don (Seymour Cassel) is pretty blase about it, while elder brother Tim (Kevin Corrigan) -- also back in his old bedroom, licking wounds from marital and career letdowns -- is outright hostile.
It's no wonder the siblings dislike each other: Being under the same roof means constant competition for the title of Most Miserable. Their total self-absorption is ignored by cynically pragmatic dad, while ma has long since dedicated herself to the illusion of a happy family.
Stuck in some undergraduate notion of nihilistic cool, Jim treats his brother's real-world problems with such cavalier disdain that Tim purposely drives into a tree. This lands him comatose in the hospital where Anika (Liv Tyler), a nurse and single mom with whom Jim has already had a pathetic one-night stand, works. Miraculously, she still seems interested in Jim, though she continues to visit Tim after he wakes up and convalesces (with two broken legs) at home.
That circumstance forces Jim -- under paternal duress -- to fill in for Tim as an elementary school girls' basketball team coach, and to work at the dreaded ladder factory owned by mom and dad. The factory also employs black-sheep relation Uncle Stacy (Mark Boone Jr.), who prefers to be called Evil, and deals drugs out of the oblivious parents' business.
Disbelief must be suspended when Jim agrees to open a checking account for Evil in his own name. As a result, blackmail enters the picture when the Feds descend on Ladder Inc., arresting Sally for allegedly operating a covert drug ring. Moment by moment, "Lonesome Jim" is likeable and funny (especially whenever dealing with Evil). Its shaggy tenor recalls such '70s mini-classics as "Rancho Deluxe" and "Slither." As seen before, Buscemi has a real feel for this kind of novelistic character comedy.
But he can't always ease viewers past the central trouble spot in Strouse's sly, amiable screenplay: A profoundly inert yet peevish protagonist whose act doesn't seem all that worth getting together. Part of the problem may lay with Affleck, who in one sense is perfectly cast, and in another might just be too passive and withdrawn an actor to make those traits as amusing, perverse or poignant as intended.
Helmer's flair for getting the understated best out of his cast otherwise holds down the line, with Boone offhandedly hilarious, and Place lending Sally surprising layers of neatly suppressed depth.
Shot on location around Goshen, Ind., HD lensing emphasizes the monochrome dreariness of a flat Midwestern winter; all other contribs are modestly right-on. Soundtrack heavy on retro soft-rock radio classics adds to pic's air of irony-dusted banality gone awry.
 Camera (color, Mini-DV 24p-to-HD), Phil Parmet; editor, Plummy Tucker; original music, Evan Lurie; music supervisors, Alex Steyermark, Linda Cohen; production designer, Chuck Voelter; costume designer, Victoria Farrell; set decorator, James Beaver; sound editor (Dolby Digital), Warren Shaw; assistant director, Jesse Nye; casting, Sheila Jaffe, Georgianne Walken. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 21, 2005. Running time: 91 MIN.
 


 
 


 

With an overture of soundtrack harmonica, wintry Midwestern loneliness, hardscrabble road-movie keynotes, and a general air of mute foreboding, Steve Buscemi 's new film Lonesome Jim  makes a big bid for '70s-ness—the desolate, figures-in-a-landscape vibe epitomized by, say, Barbara Loden 's Wanda , Jerry Schatzberg 's Scarecrow , and Monte Hellman 's Two-Lane Blacktop . But something's missing—the '70s themselves, a moment of meaning when social pessimism, counterculture market forces, grainy film stock, and folky daydreaming about the meaning of America all gelled into a frostbitten daguerreotype of disillusionment and godlessness. It's been the coolest retro-tone in dependie Hollywood  for a decade or more now, a concentrated look-back-in-envy toward a neorealism unpickled by irony. Now that digital imagery (Buscemi's film is another InDigEnt production) is virtually indistinguishable from handheld celluloid, where's the 21st century's own nasty, truth-seeking front edge?
As it is, Lonesome Jim  soon evolves into a comedy, or at least it can be one in the proper frame of mind, a toast-dry farce about depression seen, necessarily, from outside the terrarium. The titular hero is Jim  (Casey Affleck ), a gray-hearted twentysomething writer returning to his middle-class home in Indiana after failing in Manhattan, where he survived by walking dogs and waiting tables at Applebee's . His family—overbearing Mom Mary Kay Place, shrugging Dad Seymour Cassel , equally disaffected bro Kevin Corrigan —is designed to trigger everyone's fight-or-flight response, but not so absurdly that the film attains an original or adequately satiric sensibility. It's one long interlude, for us and Jim, as he endures his mom's brutal cuddling, talks down his brother so plainly that Corrigan's fleshy loser drives his car (offscreen) into a tree, hangs with a dopehead uncle who's renamed himself Evil (Mark Boone Junior ), and eventually meets—not so cutely—angelic nurse Liv Tyler , whose heaven-sent goodness and happy promiscuity seem to be what the headshrinker might've ordered.
No such luck for Jim, who mopes without recourse to salvation in alt-mag cartoonist James C. Strouse 's screenplay; as a study of the tension between glass-half-full optimism and chronic despair, it offers few, even irreverent, insights, and evades chemistry. (Antidepressants are never mentioned, but with them Buscemi wouldn't have a movie.) Lonesome Jim , as redundant as its title, has little of the grungy energy and love for decaying infrastructure Buscemi brought firsthand to the semi-autobio Trees Lounge . Affleck and Corrigan, sharing a sloe-eyed, slack-jawed anomie, make for convincing siblings, but their conversations have no past sewn into them. Of course, that's the challenge Buscemi set for himself: Make a movie about mumbling depressives that in itself won't be overcome by tedium. Despite the presence of Tyler and assorted smart-mouthed kids roaming through the narrative, he doesn't quite succeed; insofar as we empathize at all, it's not unreasonable for us to hope Tyler turns tail and forgets she ever met this family.
Jim's briefly itemized idolization of self-destructive writers like Hemingway, Breece Pancake, and Richard Yates  is all the cultural, and psychological, context we get. Shot in and around Strouse's Indiana hometown (and featuring scores of Strouse relatives in the credits, a few thanked twice), Lonesome Jim  has the import of a deliberately squelched sitcom, or a home movie that's poisoned by unhappiness but shown anyway for stray laughs.
