Ineffably Australian and intriguingly (rather than  annoyingly) artsy, Look Both Ways  introduces a handful of people gobsmacked by life-changing crises, all of them trying to make sense of responsibility, mortality, and connection. And forging her own new path, animator Sarah Watt makes a delicate, empathetic live-action directorial feature debut: She mixes her media,  returning to animation to express dreams and fantasies while establishing the connection between Meryl (Justine Clarke), an artist, and Nick (William McInnes, Watt's husband), a newspaper photographer.

 Given its preoccupation with disease and calamity, "Look Both Ways" may not be the most soothing entertainment for these high-anxiety times and for audiences primed to flinch every time a car backfires. Written and directed by the Australian animator Sarah Watt, the live-action movie follows a group of disparate and desperate characters over the course of one of the most depressing weekends in movie history. Before Monday morning, each will face the possibility of one or more of the following: unemployment, chemotherapy, abortion and death. I should probably mention it's a love story.  The principal sufferers, er, soul mates are Meryl (Justine Clarke), an illustrator of sympathy cards who's constantly imagining her own destruction, and Nick (William McInnes), a newspaper photographer who spends his days documenting disaster. The cheery pair meet at the site of a railway fatality, mere hours after Nick has been told he has testicular cancer. Prodded by a soundtrack crammed with limp ballads and the voice of a newscaster cataloging the deaths from yet another train accident, the two fall into bed, relieved to discover that a mutual fixation on catastrophe can be quite the aphrodisiac.  Bogged down by the stylistic gimmickry of bustling montages and jarring animated segments, "Look Both Ways" aims for existential drama but succeeds only in reminding us that misery loves company.  "Look Both Ways" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some animated violence and extremely nonanimated sex.
An unassuming, unadventurous, but likable dramedy about dying and grief, Sarah Watt 's debut feature, Look Both Ways, has been something of an audience-pleasing award repository, in Australia and abroad. It's not hard to see why—rename it Death, Actually , and a sense of its fluffy, faux- angsty approach is brought to bear. Watt has carved out a niche for herself as a watercolorist- animator, and the new film is regularly punctuated by mordant painterly imaginings, of both the mortality- obsessed artist-heroine (the refreshingly plain Justine Clarke ) and the cancer-haunted photog-hero (William McInnes ), detailing demise via sudden earthquakes, derailed trains, car crashes, etc. (A killer-whale fantasy has a fishy wit to it.) More than that, Watt liberally visualizes her characters' racing consciousnesses with Gatling gun montages, all of them crazily referencing death, dying, death, funerals, and more death (McInnes's dazed mope gets one that stretches from infanthood to terminal X-ray in a few manic seconds), but their buoyant speed keeps them distanced from genuine pain.
Unfortunately, the quirky drama and knee-pad farce that fill out the film, starting with an offscreen death-by-locomotive that connects everyone, is tepid and unoriginal. Among the many moratoriums you'd wish an international film culture would declare for independent filmmakers, let's include fugue mini-dramas set in strangely semi-deserted cities where the same seven people keep bumping, literally, into each other, and rom-com clichés like the frumpy single woman who talks too much, and cutely, to herself. Most of all, Watt should've won the Aussie award for Most Frequent and Obnoxiously Lengthy Song Interludes, without which her film might've clocked in at 25 minutes or less. But it's not without its frisson: McInnes has a frightfully distressed stare, and given his chiseled everydude's particular diagnosis, Ways  is one movie that makes you gallingly hyperaware of your own testicles—or whatever you've got that's vulnerable to toxicity, bad eating, smoke, and sun. Watt's montages are crammed with growing cancer cells; disease veterans or likely prospects should know they're risking a degree of queasiness for a few heartwarming homilies.
