         Andy Garcia labored for nearly 20 years to bring his directorial debut, "The Lost City," to the screen. A sprawling saga set in Havana that chronicles the fall of the Batista regime and the rise of Fidel Castro, the film was written by noted Cuban novelist G. Cabrera Infante and stars Garcia as a nightclub owner who sees his family torn apart by the political upheavals of the era.
 
  Production designer Waldemar Kalinowski and costume designer Deborah Lynn Scott do remarkable work in bringing the look of the period to life, aided by locations in the Dominican Republic, while Garcia feverishly stuffs his film with enough story strands for at least a half-dozen movies.
 


         






    Garcia has obviously over the years built "The Lost City" into such a totalizing, say-everything project that his ambitions capsize the film under the strain of such oversized expectations. Line after line is delivered as an overwrought metaphor on the state of Cuba, a tactic that might read well on the page but that transforms actors into mere ciphers and stand-ins rather than flesh-and-blood people.
 
  Garcia's passion and personal zeal for the material is plainly evident, but sometimes self-editing can be the most difficult aspect of creative work.
 
  In an era when so many films are cynical, cash-grabbing mechanisms of global corporate culture, no more and no less, it is frustrating to come across a work such as this, in which the grasp-exceeding reach and reckless vision of its creators become the biggest drawbacks rather than the film's greatest assets.
 
  In many ways, "The Lost City" would have been better off remaining an unrealized project, full of legendary promise and grand intentions.
 
  As a finished film it is a haphazard jumble.
 
 'The Lost City'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for violence
 
 A Magnolia Pictures release. Director Andy Garcia. Screenplay G. Cabrera Infante. Producers Frank Mancuso Jr., Garcia. Director of photography Emmanuel Kadosh. Editor Christopher Cibelli.
 
 Running time: 2 hours, 28 minutes.
 
 Exclusively at ArcLight, 6360 W. Sunset Blvd. (at Ivar Avenue), (323) 464-4226; Westside Pavilion, 10800 Pico Blvd. at Overland Avenue, (310) 281-8223; Rialto, 1023 Fair Oaks Ave., South Pasadena, (626) 388-2122; Town Center, 17200 Ventura Blvd., Encino, (818) 981-9811; Edwards University Town Center 6, 4245 Campus Drive, Irvine, (949) 854-8818.   

 "The Lost City," Andy Garcia's ode to the Havana of pre-Communist Cuba, is a romantic epic manqué that swoons across the screen for nearly two and a half hours without saying much, beyond that life sure was peachy before Fidel Castro came to town and ruined everything. Mr. Garcia, who emigrated from Cuba to the United States as a boy, is co-producer, director and star of this labor of love, 16 years in the making.  The city's posh pre-revolution nightlife, as imagined by the movie (filmed in the Dominican Republic), looks even more delectable than those 1950's pictures of movie stars dolled up for a night at Ciro's or the Mocambo in Hollywood.  The impoverished masses of Cubans who embraced Castro as a liberator appear only in grainy, black-and-white news clips, awkwardly shoehorned into the movie to fill in historical blanks, and in some buffoonish parodies of sour Communist apparatchiks barking orders once Mr. Castro takes over.  The story, briefly: Mr. Garcia's character, Fico Fellove, the oldest of three sons of a distinguished  professor, is living high on the hog as the owner of a glamorous Havana nightclub, El Tropico, when the revolution sweeps in. Fico's two younger brothers, Luis (Nestor Carbonell) and Ricardo (Enrique Murciano), fervently embrace the revolution, but Fico predicts the country's destruction under Castro. (Political dialogue in the film is strictly of the junior high school variety.)  With its sumptuous cinematography and flowery dialogue by the Cuban novelist G. Cabrera Infante, who died early last year, "The Lost City" aspires to be a Caribbean "Doctor Zhivago," in which Fico solemnly contemplates the wreckage of history (and the deaths of both brothers) in anger and in sorrow. The sleek, white-tuxedoed Steve Rubell of his time and place, he eventually loses his nightclub and forsakes his homeland, his parents and the love of his life to start over in New York, while obsessively dreaming of the past.  Portraying the movie's Zhivago surrogate (instead of writing poetry, he pecks disconsolately at a piano), Mr. Garcia belongs to the Omar Sharif school of acting. What little emotion he is able to conjure is concentrated in the eyes, which smolder in two modes, fiery or brooding; tears may glisten at the corners but are never spilled.    Because Mr. Garcia can't really act, there is only dead air between the moments of fire and water. The movie's Lara surrogate, Aurora (the staggeringly beautiful model Inés Sastre), is just as wooden. In their star-crossed romance, she remains forever torn between her passion for Fico and her official role as Widow of the Revolution.  The film's best action sequence is a failed raid on the presidential palace. But it pales in comparison to the Cuban section of "The Godfather: Part II," which "The Lost City" self-consciously echoes. In its unwieldy length and pulpy grandiosity, "The Lost City" also echoes a different "Godfather" film, Part III, in which Mr. Garcia played Michael Corleone's protégé, Don Vincent. As that movie does, "The Lost City" lunges back and forth between intimate confrontations and historical events in a clumsy effort to fuse personal and social upheaval. But because its characters pontificate in generalities and aphorisms, they're little more than stick figures with cartoon balloons pasted over their heads.  The oddest contribution to the film is from Bill Murray, who appears as Fico's sardonic sidekick. Identified only as the Writer, the character, an expatriate American comedian who is never at loss for an enigmatic quip, serves as the film's solo Greek chorus. This kind of Brechtian device might work in a novel or onstage, but in a would-be epic film it feels gratingly out of place. Dustin Hoffman appears briefly (and ineffectually) as the gangster Meyer Lansky, a character who has no reason to be in the movie other than to put Mr. Hoffman's name on the marquee.  In its groggy way "The Lost City" holds your attention. Incoherent, but splendidly panoramic and drenched in wonderful Cuban music, it has the texture of a vivid, intoxicating dream that seems to mean something until you wake up and feel it slipping away. All that remains are feelings and impressions connected by a mood.  The film is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for violence.

To leave or not to leave weighs heavy on the denizens of "The Lost City," actor-director Andy Garcia's melancholic ode to his native Cuba during the revolutionary late-1950s. On and off drawing boards for nearly two decades, this longtime dream project for Garcia and late novelist-critic Guillermo Cabrera Infante (who died in February) emerges as a handsomely produced, deeply passionate, but seriously flawed historical epic whose reach far exceeds its grasp. Somewhere inside this overlong, sometimes engaging, often tedious affair, there may be a solid, 100-minute movie, which Garcia and an enterprising distributor might be advised to find before braving commercial waters. 
Given its dramatic potential, the story of Cuba on the doorstep of Fidel Castro's Communist Revolution has been notoriously ill-served by movies, with two high-profile Hollywood endeavors -- Richard Lester's "Cuba" and Sydney Pollack's "Havana" -- employing the events of 1958 as little more than an exotic backdrop for sudsy romantic melodrama.
From the start, "The Lost City" positions itself as a more serious-minded endeavor. Set in and around the cosmopolitan Havana cabaret scene, pic's action unfolds largely within the El Tropico nightclub, whose apolitical owner, Fico Fellove (Garcia), strives to use his popular business as a buffer from the winds of historical change -- winds that Fico's father (Tomas Milian), a distinguished Havana U. professor, dismisses.
Fico's brothers, however, feel the revolutionary fire in their veins. In one of the film's most impressive set pieces, Luis (Nestor Carbonell) takes part in an ill-fated raid on the presidential palace. Later, Ricardo (Enrique Murciano) heads into the jungles to fight alongside Castro and Che. And of course there is a woman, Aurora (played by supermodel Ines Sastre), who begins as Luis' wife but ends up in Fico's arms.
In the final analysis, "The Lost City" is only a marginally more meaningful Cuba film than its superficial Hollywood predecessors. Like Fico, Garcia has a tremendous sense of showmanship, and his movie is piled high with exuberant musical numbers that flood the screen with color, plus a raft of big-star cameos from the likes of Dustin Hoffman (as Meyer Lansky) and Bill Murray (as an expat American comedy writer whose acerbic personality is said to have been modeled on Infante himself).
But Garcia spends so much time on those scenes that he loses track of his main characters, and the more "The Lost City" goes on, the more narrowly it focuses on Fico and his club to the exclusion of other family members and even the revolution. There are no shots of the poverty-stricken workers whose plight was the impetus for the revolt. It's as though Garcia had started out trying to make the Cuban equivalent of "The Godfather" and ended up settling for "The Cotton Club" instead.
What keeps "The Lost City" afloat is the commitment of the enterprise. Garcia has given better performances, and, as a director, he still has much to learn about where to put the camera, but his heartfelt drive to make the project happen (which ended up meaning on a much smaller budget and shooting schedule than the screenplay demanded) spills forth.
Garcia is also to be lauded for taking a political stance -- which is to say, regarding Batista, Che and Castro with equal contempt -- that could make him unpopular in certain circles. Good intentions, though, still only count for so much -- especially when the climactic revolution occurs and the movie still has nearly 45 minutes left to go.
While there are traces in Infante's screenplay of the writer's famously felicitous wordplay ("Havana is no longer a capital city, but a capital sin," the Fellove patriarch remarks at one point), there are also a number of instances in which the characters speechify pedantically.
Also, while pic's press notes make much of Garcia's scrupulous music supervision, selecting songs intended to match characters for instance, that hard work will be lost on non-Spanish-speaking audiences, given that none of the song lyrics have been subtitled into English.
Shot in the Dominican Republic, a frequent movie substitute for Cuba, pic's design elements are strong, though Emmanuel Kadosh's lensing is largely flat and overlit.


Among Hollywoodized glosses on the Cuban revolution, if Sydney Pollack 's Havana   was a tracing from Casablanca  , Andy Garcia 's The Lost City  stylistically revisits The Godfather , complete with multi-scion-in-tuxes dynasty, formal translated-to-English patois, deep umber shadows, concerns about "respect," meetings with sly Jews (Dustin Hoffman  as an inscrutable Meyer Lansky ), even old-timer (Richard Bradford ) having a coronary in a sunny garden. In turnaround for two decades or so, Garcia's pet project (written by the late novelist and critic Guillermo Cabrera Infante ) focuses first on three upper-class brothers (Garcia, Nestor Carbonell , Enrique Murciano ) as the 1959 usurpation looms; then it falls into a long, moony romantic abyss involving a "widow of the revolution" (Ines Sastre ). For no apparent reason Bill Murray  (playing a nameless American comedian, or something) inhabits the margins like a non-sequitur Greek chorus. Staged with credibility and loads of Cubano flair, the film slows to a sludgy crawl, giving us lots of time to consider it as a pro-old-guard, anti- revolutionary elegy—like a rumba-inflected Gone With the Wind , Garcia's tale bemoans the loss of easy wealth for a precious few. Poor people are absolutely absent; Garcia and Infante seem to have thought that peasant revolutions happen for no particular reason—or at least no reason the moneyed 1 percent should have to worry about.
