In a performance filmed in Brooklyn in 2006, Lou Reed  gives his 1973 drugs-and-suicide-and-domestic-breakdown album Berlin  the classic-rock treatment (horns, teen choir, Antony  on vocals). Yet this luminously shot concert movie, directed by Julian Schnabel  (who does with film stocks and video images created by his daughter what he used to do with plates), reveals that Berlin  is far from the lost masterpiece the movie wants it to be. Reed and the band get a momentum going in ''Men of Good Fortune'' and the great girl-group bop ''Caroline Says I,'' but as the relationship chronicled by the songs withers, so does the music's majesty.

 In Julian Schnabel’s grimly majestic concert film “Lou Reed’s Berlin,” Mr. Reed wears the deadpan smirk of a Zen master who has endured unusually punishing Buddhist training. His look isn’t that of a blissed-out monk newly returned from mountaintop meditations. It is the grimly amused seen-it-all stare of a voyeuristic chronicler of drug-fueled sadomasochistic rituals in the grittier corners of cities that never sleep. This is the real world, Mr. Reed seems to signal, while strumming tough minimalist riffs on his guitar and singing in a quavering, gravelly monotone: Get used to it, boys and girls.  At the December 2006 concerts of Mr. Reed’s rock oratorio “Berlin” at St. Ann’s Warehouse in Brooklyn, where the movie was filmed, Mr. Reed performed with a 35-piece ensemble conducted by his fellow guitarist Steve Hunter, who played on the original 1973 “Berlin” album. The movie faithfully reproduces the sound of that record, which was a commercial disappointment when released.  A digressive 10-song suite, “Berlin” chronicles the disintegration of a couple’s relationship in West Berlin in the era before the wall dividing East and West was torn down. The wife (or lover), Caroline (filmed for a fragmentary silent movie within the movie by the director’s daughter Lola Schnabel  and played by Emmanuelle Seigner), is a speed and sex addict who sneers at her partner for being passive and unmanly, and binges on depravity until the authorities step in and take away their children. Caroline eventually commits suicide by slashing her wrists.  Her partner, Jim (Mr. Reed), narrates the story in the tone of a helpless bystander whose bottled rage sporadically leaks out, only to be swallowed as he resumes his attitude of stoic detachment. In the final number, “Sad Song,” Jim, still besotted with the memory of Caroline, confesses in Mr. Reed’s typical clipped verbiage: “I thought she was Mary, Queen of Scots/My castle kids and home/I tried so very hard/Shows just how wrong you can be.”  “Berlin” evokes Gail Sheehy’s exposé, “Speed Is of the Essence,” published in 1971, when the perils of methedrine addiction were just beginning to be recognized. The book’s centerpiece portrayed a desperate drug-addicted couple spiraling toward insanity.  Mr. Schnabel’s set design depicting Jim and Caroline’s seedy hotel room suggests a battered Chinese scroll. Projections flickering across it create a semi-abstract murk that reflects the ceaseless agitation described in the songs.  Those songs are some of the most melodic and tender of Mr. Reed’s career. The original record, produced by Bob Ezrin in the grand style of ’70s concept albums, is Mr. Reed’s most operatic. For the concert, in addition to basic rock instrumentation, intensely dramatic arrangements with four horn and reed players, two violas and a cello were used. In the more contemplative passages, the music seems to hover as though holding its breath until the last second before a storm breaks. When it does, the guitars swell to a howling crescendo that evokes the passing of a tornado.  Demons charge through this music, but so do angels. The voices of the Brooklyn Youth Chorus lend the score a thread of eerie sweetness. In the most evocative moment, the voices flutter downward like falling angels sighing in defeat.  The concert’s three encores, not from “Berlin,” include Mr. Reed’s ominously quiet “Rock Minuet,” from his 2000 album “Ecstasy”; “Candy Says,” a duet between Mr. Reed and the ethereal-voiced Antony (of Antony and the Johnsons) that evokes the same demonic-seraphic dichotomy found in “Berlin”; and his Velvet Underground classic, “Sweet Jane.”  In the film’s production notes, Mr. Schnabel describes “Berlin” as the soundtrack of his life. I hesitate to imagine what that means. As a cautionary tale “Lou Reed’s Berlin” is an 85-minute public-service announcement that preaches “Just say no.” The force of the music, however, lends this tawdry melodrama a tragic stature.  “Lou Reed’s Berlin” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). There are images of depravity and strong language.

At the height of his popularity in 1973, Lou Reed released "Berlin," an ambitious, Brechtian song-cycle album chronicling a couple's drug- and violence-spattered downward spiral. A critical and commercial disaster at the time ("the most depressing album ever made"), platter subsequently attained cult status. Thirty-three years later, in Brooklyn, Reed gave the album its first live performance, with a production designed by Julian Schnabel, who also filmed it for posterity. Less groundbreaking video experimentation than extraordinary concert experience, "Lou Reed's Berlin" expertly fulfills its function. Limited arthouse exposure followed by extensive DVD rollout seems indicated.
Reed's complex, stage-filling orchestration incorporates strings, horns and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus. The performance unites original musicians like lead guitarist Steve Hunter with young guest vocalists like Anthony of Anthony and the Johnsons (whose pure rendition of "Candy Says" offsets the gravel-voiced Reed to perfection). Along with now-classic "Berlin" cuts like "How Do You Think It Feels?" and "The Bed," Reed includes the Velvet Underground retread "Sweet Jane" and his later composition "Rock Minuet." As shot by the incomparable Ellen Kuras, the concert retains a rich organic feel, complementing the music without over-determining it.
Camera (color, HD), Ellen Kuras; editor, Benjamin Flaherty; music, Lou Reed; set designer, Schnabel. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (Horizons), Sept. 4, 2007. (Also in Toronto Film Festival --Real to Reel.) Running time: 81 MIN.
 


The most epic musical moment at this year's South by Southwest Festival  was a Lou Reed  tribute extravaganza, a tented Texan sweatfest that saw the guest of honor publicly kissing Moby  on the cheek (!) and a string of cover- song mini-sets from rock stalwarts Yo La Tengo , Thurston Moore , and My Morning Jacket . Invariably, Lou's homage-payers gravitated toward no-fail classics (i.e. "Pale Blue Eyes," "Candy Says," "I'm Not a Young Man Anymore" in title alone), but singer-songwriterly type Mark Kozelek  went for the quadruple Axel of Reed covers: "The Kids," a desolate doozy from Reed's tragic opus Berlin  , about a "miserable rotten slut" mother getting her children taken away. Amid SXSW's jubilant air of free booze and paid vacation, the tune went over about as well as the Rolling Stones ' "You Can't Always Get What You Want" at a wedding reception: Everybody run for the bar.
Berlin  is not a record for schmoozing and sun. It's a concept record best savored in solitary, in the fetal position, while slurping on a bottle of wine. The doomed love story of addicts Jim and Caroline, Berlin 's 10 songs cycle through the couple's initial drug-euphoric enchantment, their violent betrayals, their fatal collapse. But when the album first came out in 1973, as the startlingly somber follow-up to Reed's Bowie-produced glam-rock triumph Transformer  ("Walk on the Wild Side"), Berlin  was largely dismissed as a creative and commercial flop, an indulgent fallout from Reed's messy first divorce.
Things change: 30 years later, pieces of the Berlin Wall  are for sale on the Internet, and Lou's German-junkie ode has been recast as a masterpiece. Reed had never performed Berlin  live in full until 2006, with a landmark five-day stretch at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn . Director/artist Julian Schnabel  brought cameras to commit the performance to celluloid; the record's original producer, Bob Ezrin , was enlisted to oversee. Redemption all around.
The result is Lou Reed's Berlin , a concert film by technicality, a cinematic trance in practicality. True to its source material, this is a mood piece. From the noisy cabaret confusion of wistful opener "Berlin" to the affecting coda "Sad Song," we are adrift in a live Lou Reed performance that Schnabel has captured in grainy-film reverie, all flickering silhouettes, soft-focus flourishes, and dreamy sepia tones. Onstage, the band stands before a backdrop that Schnabel made to evoke the residential hotel where Caroline lives in "Lady Day"—beneath a tawny-green pattern, Lou looks imprisoned by mildew fractals and water stains. Projections also flutter behind him, interpretive scenes shot by Schnabel's daughter Lola that end up interspersed within the film's final cut. This is where we meet Caroline, a carefree, grinning, drooly-mouthed blonde with bicep bruises and high eyes, played—or, more accurately, mimed—by French actress Emmanuelle Seigner . One minute, the infamously irascible Reed is onstage actually smiling, the next Seigner's arm-in-arm with some doofus in a Betty Boop  shirt. When it comes to films spun off soundtracks, essaying visuals can be pretty worrisome—ever seen Oliver Stone 's The Doors  ? Thankfully, Schnabel uses these pseudo-narrations sparingly: In the end, ambience is the only plot, atmosphere Reed's only worthy co-star.
Yes, this may be Lou Reed's Berlin , but it's more a bygone New York experience than having a subway bum puke on your lap. For one, Reed and Schnabel are both such uniquely 800-pound New York gorillas, they belong in the Bronx Zoo . For two, Berlin was just a handy "metaphor"—Reed told the Times  he'd never been back then—and what better fractured-relationship trope than a Cold War locus with an impenetrable wall and an east/west divide? Then there are the tremendous back-up singers, local vocal belters who embody pre-McHattan archetypes far better than, say, fucking Vampire Weekend : retro-soul queen Sharon Jones , who not long ago was redeemed after years as a Rikers  correction officer; Antony Hegarty , the androgynous canary and early-'00s downtown cabaret fixture who's something of a polite Jayne County. And as for that atmosphere, Schnabel somehow magically makes the subdued hues of St. Ann's feel like a grand loft space. So after Berlin  gets a standing ovation and Reed segues into the "Rock Minuet" from 2000's Ecstasy , sing-speaking about slitting a perp's throat in an alley off Avenue B, it doesn't come off like his mind has returned from some faraway place to reclaim a lost medal. It seems like he just never left.
