Nearly three decades after Ordinary People , Timothy Hutton is back for more sadness  in the 1970s suburbs in Lymelife . In this overworked  if heartfelt indie, Hutton broods in his  basement as a distant dad whose vague, unchecked symptoms of debilitating Lyme disease (contracted on tick-infested Long Island) symbolize the vague, unchecked anomie of the era. (Just a guess.) Rory Culkin commands attention, though, as the teen boy next door, negotiating the usual sad-suburbs terrors of first love and tension between his squabbling parents, played by Long Island-bred Alec Baldwin (who also produced) and Jill Hennessy.
See all current movie reviews from EW

 Sometime late in “Lymelife” the  director Derick Martini cuts to a close-up of a weeping teenager with a shot so tightly framed you can see the glistening curves of the tears clinging to the boy’s eyelashes. It’s an unexpectedly moving image, a reminder that the close-up, in its ability to bring us near to the poetry of the human face, remains one of cinema’s most potent if often squandered techniques. (Television has largely helped us forget just how potent.) Those tears transform the teenage character, Scott Bartlett (Rory Culkin): they briefly strip away the clichés encrusting him and offer us a glimpse of the real.  The interlude may not last long, but it confirms that Mr. Martini, making his first feature, has enough filmmaking gifts to cut through the formulaic accretions that he and his brother, Steven Martini, have amassed for their screenplay. Those accretions begin with Scott, a Long Island sad sack who lives with his unhappily married parents, Mickey (Alec Baldwin) and Brenda (Jill Hennessy), and pines for the girl literally next door, Adrianna Bragg (Emma Roberts). Adrianna comes with her own miserable parents, Melissa (Cynthia Nixon) and Charlie (Timothy Hutton), along with a seductive sullen mouth. But there are complications separating him and his dream girl, including one boy with hot wheels and another with fast fists, who turns Scott’s timidity into a humiliating public spectacle.  The agonies of adolescence have been served up so many times and in so many different if similar ways on the American screen that it’s a wonder there’s anything left to say about the subject. The same goes for the suburbs, those oases of collective ennui where faded beauty queens clench their jaws as their men sputter and children flail. “Lymelife” tosses some visual tics (and ticks) into the usual crabgrass, including an already overplayed  movie fetish for the 1970s.  Set in the last year of that decade, it trots out the requisite glamour don’ts (Brenda’s plaid jacket, Melissa’s color palette) that telegraph meaning as loudly as a soundtrack that mixes jukebox regulars (Boston, Frank Sinatra) with tinkling songs from Steven  Martini’s band, the SpaceShip Martini.  The implied idealism of Scott and Adrianna’s burgeoning romance makes a painful if overly obvious contrast to the wretched adult relationships. If the differences between new and soured love don’t register meaningfully, though, it’s  because the grown-ups are drawn too broadly and without the nuance — the expository fights are particularly off key — that might obscure the narrative schema. The cartoonish Melissa and her foil, Charlie, who may be suffering from psychological damage brought on by Lyme disease, are especially unpersuasive. Despite Mr. Hutton’s expressive way with silence — when Charlie sits wordlessly in a darkened room, the actor seems to gather the darkness up  inside him — the character can’t escape a fate (and gun) that seems to have been created for the sole purpose of bringing the story to a close.  Despite such floundering, “Lymelife” keeps you hooked, mostly through Mr. Hutton, Mr. Baldwin and Kieran Culkin as Scott’s older brother, Jimmy. (The Culkins are also brothers.) Mr. Baldwin makes playing jerks look easy, but what’s consistently wonderful about this actor is how he always uncovers something unexpected even in overworked terrain. That’s certainly the case in an unnerving scene that finds Mickey baiting Jimmy, egging him on until the son does exactly what Mickey wants and hits his father. Nothing in the film, including the images of a model development  filled with tiny plastic people and tiny plastic houses, speaks to the hurt that can come with love as eloquently as the rage that fills — and empties — the faces of these men.  “Lymelife” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).  Adult language, partial nudity, a beating and a brandished gun.

Startling performances, searing dialogue and an archaeologist's sense of late '70s period detail power the violently funny "Lymelife." Named, a tad regrettably, for the paranoid condition of wood-tick-fearing middle-class Long Islanders, the second feature written by the Martini brothers, Steven and first-time director Derick, gradually reveals itself as a film about the pressures and consequences of upward mobility and ordinary adolescence. Intense perfs by Rory Culkin and Alec Baldwin are standouts in a movie that brims with vivid supporting turns. Cross-generational marketing ops make "Lymelife" a solid bet for specialty distribs seeking a leaner and meaner "American Beauty."
The Martinis' previous screenplay, for "Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire," showed considerable promise but not the ambitious sort on display here. Coalescing into a representative portrait of pre-Reagan change, the pair's admittedly autobiographical film, dedicated to their late grandparents, centers on thin, 15-year-old bully magnet Scott (Rory Culkin), whose older, bulkier brother, Jim (Kieran Culkin), prepares to ship off to military duty, and whose longtime crush, Adrianna (Emma Roberts), reluctantly begins to return his timid gaze. 
Two sets of parents seem to compete for dysfunctional-behavior prizes: Adrianna's pill-popping father, Charlie (Timothy Hutton), shoots self-made targets in the woods with a rifle, dressed in suit and tie, while her uptight mother, Melissa (Cynthia Nixon), trysts in a dingy cellar with Scott's angry-workaholic dad, Mickey (Baldwin).
Mickey's underappreciated wife, Brenda (Jill Hennessy), duct-tapes her youngest son from head to toe to protect him from Lyme disease. Periodic cutaways to wandering deer and the real or imagined threat of wood ticks -- not to mention scenes of believably harsh marital bickering -- serve the pic's point that these frightened, emotionally starved people, kids included, are animals at best.
Despite a few minor missteps, the film is fully imagined in visual and aural terms, teasingly meting out details, keeping us deliberately off-balance as to the exact purpose of its pitch-black humor and withholding clear placement of the time period until a TV news report provides a clue. Initially brisk, the pace slows to a riveting crawl once Scott and Adrianna endeavor to lose their virginity in his action-figure-laden bedroom, and the film wrings every moment of awkwardness out of the encounter. The film is rare for continuing to gain momentum in its final third, escalating toward an explosive rage.
As menacing Mickey, Baldwin makes the most of the script's roughest lines, delivering them with gravelly sarcasm and precise, Mametian beats. His seethingly elliptical comment to his wife -- "You can take the girl outta Queens, am I right?" -- is both purely hilarious and revealing of the film's pungent class critique. Mustachioed Hutton, looking pallid and sweaty from his character's ambiguous illness and drugs, plays an unforgettable barroom scene in which he relentlessly toys with Baldwin's philanderer like a cat with a mouse.
As Scott, the younger Culkin has a fabulous "You talkin' to me?" mirror scene where he impersonates Han Solo -- a brilliant evocation of how this late-'70s youth culture fetishized not Martin Scorsese's "Taxi Driver," but its opposite number, "Star Wars."
Scorsese serves as exec producer here, and his influence is felt in a film that grounds its social observations in tense humor and razor-sharp detail. Film also displays a Scorsesian appreciation of pop, as the period soundtrack ranges from Bob Dylan's "Walkin' Down the Line" to Sinatra's "Cheek to Cheek" and Bad Company's "Feel Like Makin' Love." One hopes a buyer would help keep the tunes intact, as the festival print's end credits, alas, claim "all source music TBD."


There's nothing new under the suburban sun (save for infectious ticks) in Derick Martini 's Lymelife , whose weighty allegorical title and fastidious 1970s accoutrements aim to do for beer-and-pretzels Long Island  what Ang Lee 's The Ice Storm  did for tony, key-party Connecticut. Dad (Alec Baldwin ) is shtupping the secretary (Cynthia Nixon ); mom (Jill Hennessy ) pretends not to notice; eldest son Jimmy (Kieran Culkin ) is about to ship out to the Falklands War (the movie's handy Vietnam /Iraq  surrogate); and 15-year-old Scott (Rory Culkin ) feels his first pangs of lustful desire in the direction of the neighbor girl (Emma Roberts ), whose father (Timothy Hutton ) is suffering from the debilitating effects of Lyme disease. Adding insult to irony, Baldwin is a real estate developer, peddling picture-postcard views of the American Dream while watching his own slowly implode, just as Hennessy discovers that all the bug spray and duct-taped pant legs in the world can't ward off the bite of disillusionment and self-deception. Hutton, meanwhile—a bedraggled figure in pajamas and ever-present hunting rifle (at one point, he communes with a deer, à la Helen Mirren  in The Queen )—seems to be transformed by illness into a truth-telling seer. Given how steeped it is in symbolic portent, Lymelife  proves surprisingly watchable from moment to moment, thanks to the uniformly fine playing (particularly of the Culkin frères), evocative production design (by Kelly McGehee ), and handsome widescreen photography (by Frank Godwin ). If only its substantial craft and atmosphere were matched by an equally compelling reason for being.
