he sight of a roomful of modern New York City fifth graders determinedly going through the paces of traditional ballroom dancing - the fox trot, the rumba, even the sultry tango - has a certain charming incongruity. The dances, with their old-style Astaire-and-Rogers urbanity, fit oddly with the unlithe bodies and dressed-down urban attitudes of today's American schoolchildren. Nonetheless, thanks to a program organized by the American Ballroom Theater, students in 60 New York elementary schools not only learn the steps and postures but also display them in an annual tournament. Their competition is the subject of "Mad Hot Ballroom," a slight, charming documentary directed by Marilyn Agrelo. The film was snapped up in January by Paramount Classics shortly after it made its debut at Slamdance (the scruffy stepchild of the Sundance Film Festival). It is the latest crowd-pleasing documentary to use a narrative device long relied upon by fictional sports movies: the road to the big game. Ms. Agrelo and her co-producer, Amy Sewell, first-time filmmakers, went to three public schools in different parts of New York and followed their students through the stages of competition leading to a final event at the World Financial Center. The prize was a trophy taller than most of the competitors, and also the kind of glory that fuels the dreams of many young people. Like the young orthographers in "Spellbound," these kids show tremendous pluck and discipline, as well as a sometimes overwhelming desire to win. Not all of them can, of course, which is one of the hard lessons competition teaches. And not every documentary on a beguiling subject is entirely successful. The built-in suspense of the road to the final tournament (and the serendipitous development that at least one of the three schools makes it  that far) gives "Mad Hot Ballroom" its shape. The young dancers - from TriBeCa, Washington Heights and Bensonhurst, Brooklyn - give it perkiness and personality, but it misses the chance to present them in their full individuality. The interviews with them are fascinating - in addition to dancing, they talk about school, the streets and the state of relations between girls and boys - but also superficial. Nonetheless, the dancing itself is fun to watch, both comical and genuinely touching, and any movie that captures some of the ineffable, magical process by which people learn is bound to be inspiring. There is also a glimpse at the ways class and ethnicity inform the lives of the city's children. The young sophisticates of TriBeCa seem not only materially better off than their counterparts uptown or in Brooklyn, but also confident of their superiority. In spite of their teacher's concerns about foisting too much competition on them, they expect to win. The children of Washington Heights, on the other hand - or at least their passionate, dynamic teacher - feel as if they need to win. Their school district is one of Manhattan's poorest, comprised largely of immigrants from the Dominican Republic, and the students' aspirations are shadowed by the realities of crime, poverty and broken families. The richness of the material makes "Mad Hot Ballroom" both fascinating and frustrating. There are subplots that seem buried in the hectic routines of practice and competition. We hear testimony, toward the end, about how participation in the program has changed some of the children's lives, but we are unable to witness, or even to intuit, the transformation. Ms. Agrelo and Ms. Sewell deserve praise for discovering and illuminating this delightful corner of an educational system that is often portrayed in the grimmest terms, but their execution falls a bit short. "Mad Hot Ballroom" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has some mild references to violence and sexuality.

"Mad Hot Ballroom" is as lovely and sweet a film as any that unspooled in January at Park City. That it preemed at Slamdance rather than Sundance proved a coup for the upstart fest, whose opening night platform set the stage for Paramount Classics'$4 million pickup. Perky and effortlessly smooth docu, about Gotham tweens in a citywide ballroom dancing competition and in the caring adults who surround them, looks to score biz along the lines of a "Spellbound," with which it shares an emotional interest in public school students.
At its heart, the pic is about the making of "little ladies and gentlemen," in the words of teary-eyed teacher Allison Sheniak of PS 150 in Tribeca. But it's all much less square than it sounds, since director Marilyn Agrelo is able to capture with easy charm and grace what happens between 10- and 11-year-old boys and girls as they break out of their childhood shells and interact with each other -- and surprise themselves with abilities they didn't know they had.
Sheniak's group, guided by patient dance coach Alex Tchassov, appears to be a typical cross-section of students, some extremely engaged (Tara Devon Gallagher practices devotedly in front of her bedroom mirror) and others who couldn't care less.
Teacher Yomaira Reynoso's competing group at PS 115 in Washington Heights (coached by Rodney Lopez) has far fewer resources and many more at-risk kids, but is bubbling with talent and has also nearly won the city's top prize before.
And kids at PS 112 in Bensonhurst, far from being contenders, seem to be dancing for fun, encouraged by their energetic principal Louise Verdemare, who profoundly sums up ballroom dancing's value : "It's more than learning steps ... it's etiquette ... it's life." Taha Natab, at the ethnically diverse 112, says his Islamic sect prohibits dancing, but he still helps out by spinning the music to dances ranging from merengue and rumba to foxtrot, swing and tango.
Docu takes great joy in the people it films, allowing kids to be themselves at school and home (where the boys and girls let their hair down and say what they really think about the other sex) and showing, even more than "Spellbound," just how important teachers are.Pic tends to soften the dangerous lives of the kids at 115, in a poor area of mostly Dominican Republic emigres, but it also shows that, even at age 10, these little ones are fully aware of the risks around them and are driven to succeed, and avoid drugs and crime.
"Mad Hot" also reps a new trend in Yank non-fiction to depict characters in competition leading up to a main event, which here takes up the pic's entire second half.
Besides getting a bevy of cute shots of kids awkwardly trying to coordinate with each other, Agrelo couldn't have been luckier with story's Hollywood ending, imbued with a sense that what's being observed isn't just kids winning or losing, but lives being saved from the mean streets.
Bright production package is distinguished by Claudia Raschke-Robinson's ultra-clean vid lensing and an editing job by Sabine Krayenbuhl that's as smooth and crafty as the best foxtrot move.

Like Spellbound 's glimpse of the darker side of childhood competition, Mad Hot Ballroom —a look at New York City schools' fifth-grade ballroom dance program—is best when exploring issues of class and gender and definitions of success. Director Marilyn Agrelo  picks three fascinating schools—in Tribeca, Bensonhurst , and Washington Heights —and documents the 10 weeks from introduction to all-city finals.
While the kiddie rumbas and swing-outs can be adorable, aside from some Washington Heights students who dance regularly at home, none of the participants are prodigies. A bigger blast is the interview footage, especially of the girls, more poignantly self-possessed than the boys. The more cosmopolitan Tribeca group is blissfully able to enjoy boy-girl friendships, while the Dominican girls of upper Manhattan deal with harsher sexual circumstances, at one point discussing fears about walking past groups of drunk, leering men. In the Brooklyn  group, amid giggles over crushes, one pensive Asian girl blurts, "The strange thing about being a girl is, you have to be pregnant." In the dance classes, roles are similarly certain. Teachers adhere to a strict boy-girl policy. When kids are absent, stragglers hold on to air—boys leading imaginary girls, girls following ghostly partners. Frequent calls to be "ladies and gentlemen" exist in friction with other messages about gender and the body—e.g., it's OK for boys to dance; it's OK to be friends with girls; anyone can enjoy the pleasure of creative movement. Notably, when the instructors dance together after an administrative meeting, this male-female policy goes out the window.
As gender-specific school sports encroach, the dance program feels like a small reprieve—but one incident foreshadows coming rifts: A fine dancer, after calling a talented Spanish-speaking teammate "gay," ditches ballroom for basketball. Though one Washington Heights teacher pushes her team with vicarious zeal, the 10-week period doesn't produce Spellbound -like stage parents. That said, it would have been great to have more sequences of the kids at home—one foosball game in an American-flag-bedecked Bensonhurst basement leaves us yearning for more intimate portraits. And where Spellbound 's academic component produced a suspect but palpable thrill around the complicated promise of upward mobility, this dance contest, despite its undeniable merits, can't help but seem the more tenuous triumph.
