         "Margaret Cho: The Assassin Tour," a deft filming of the corrosive comedian's latest concert performance, finds Cho angrier and funnier than ever. She may be a blowtorch to the extreme Christian right, but for many she's a breath of fresh air. That she's standing in front of a mike, speaking her mind to packed houses, is in itself a ray of hope in dark times.
 
  Outside Washington's venerable Warner Theatre, where her performance was about to be filmed, fans comment: "She stands up for all the people.... There's nothing she won't say.... She's funny and unpredictable."
 


         






    Cho is all that and more, and it's crucial that she is as hilarious as she is scorching because it allows her to get away with everything she attempts — even a particularly breathtaking jab at the Bush first ladies, Laura and Barbara, that few stand-ups would dare, let alone carry off — that is if they could even think of it in the first place.
 
  A terrific mime with amazing expressiveness, Cho has a fertile, untrammeled imagination that shapes vignettes and one-liners that unfailingly hit their intended targets. She understands the potency of crude language when used in inspired fashion, and above all she appreciates the value of unvarnished honesty. Directed in an apt, no-frills fashion by Kerry Asmussen, "Margaret Cho: The Assassin Tour," will, in addition to its theatrical release, also air on the cable network Here!
 
  As a feminist, a friend of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgendered people and someone dead set against the Iraq war, Cho has plenty to get her riled up, and her favorite target is President Bush, who she says "is not Hitler — he could be if he applied himself."
 
  She excoriates him for invading Iraq without an exit strategy, declares him to be "the most embarrassing president in history" and accuses him of indifference to tsunami victims since they don't produce oil — only batik. Along with her opposition to the war, Cho's recurring themes are America's lack of respect for women and its homophobia, and she comes up with myriad ways to demolish those who would take away abortion rights or deny civil rights to the gay community.
 
  She protests the selection of John R. Bolton to represent the U.S. in the U.N. and deplores invasion of privacy by government and the right-to-lifers in the Terry Schiavo controversy.
 
  She wonders how abortion opponents can support the war in Iraq, where so many are losing their lives. She says Christians have no right to call themselves that when they show no compassion or charity.
 
  Cho is too savvy an entertainer not to temper her indignation at times for fun's sake. She gives spot-on impressions of, among others, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger — while skewering his policies — the singer Björk and even of Chinese star Zhang Ziyi. No Margaret Cho performance would be complete without a takeoff on her own mother, who she informs us, having recovered from a heart attack, now experiences astral projection.
 
  The fan who remarked that Cho stands up for all the people is on the mark, for she understands the power of humor to provoke thought and to liberate. She has something to say to everyone, and one can only hope that she is preaching to more than her choir of devoted fans.
 
 'Margaret Cho: The Assassin Tour'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 Times guidelines:
 Much blunt, sexually explicit language
 
 A Regent Entertainment/Here! presentation. Director Kerry Asmussen. Technical director J.W. Griffith. Executive producers Paul Colichman, Stephen P. Jarchow, Margaret Cho, Karen Taussig, Rick Scott, Joel Lipman. Executive producer for Here! Eric Feldman. Technical producer John Hartmann. Cameras Bill Barber, David Insley, Mike Moser. Lighting designer Jeffery Ravitz. Editor Nancy Rosenblum. Music Paula Gallitano. Running time: 1 hour, 25 minutes.  Exclusively at the Regent Showcase, 614 No. La Brea Ave., (323) 934-2944.   

Equal parts inspired clown, committed advocate and ferocious Republican-baiter, the comedian Margaret Cho explains why she chose "Assassin" as the title of her latest tour. "I wanted a name that would drive the right crazy," chortles the Korean-American, whose very existence - she is also outspokenly liberal, feminist and bisexual - is probably sufficient to accomplish that particular goal. "Margaret Cho: The Assassin Tour" is a live taping of Ms. Cho's stand-up performance on May 14 at the Warner Theater in Washington. With the White House just three blocks away, she's not pulling any punches: "Bush is no Hitler. He would be if he applied himself," she opines, as her audience roars in approval. While Ms. Cho's fan base is primarily gay and lesbian, with much of her material addressing homophobia and gay rights, her attacks on injustice and hypocrisy are universal. Railing against the ubiquity of Viagra versus the unavailability of the morning-after pill ("I want it with my check at dinner!"), and turning an astute eye on the Martha Stewart conviction ("America just hates women who are successful and not nice about it"), Ms. Cho seeks out the bruises on American culture and gleefully applies pressure. Though specializing in confrontational, caustic and often raunchy humor, Ms. Cho has a relaxed and playful stage presence. She's not a screamer, or a pacer, or a frantic gesticulator; her movements are economical and gentle, and she waits for her facial expressions to sink in. Her comic timing, honed after decades of public performance, is impeccable. Whether discussing the tedium of England ("where white people begin the whitening process") or the Schwarzenegger governorship ("we didn't get punk'd"), her manner is hey-girlfriend chatty. And while there is a certain amount of preaching to the liberal choir, with predictable attacks on Rush Limbaugh and Ann Coulter, many of the jokes have a head-snapping cleverness. "Being gay is not outrageous," she declares, "and if you think it is, you're gay!" Ms. Cho sees her minority status as the ultimate freedom to express. Having "a membership in every club," she says, allows her to say whatever is on her mind, and that sometimes involves a head-on collision between social relevance and good taste. (A Terry Schiavo impersonation, for instance, walks this line brilliantly.) But though Ms. Cho's most lethal jokes are reserved for inequality in all its forms, it would be a shame if the politics eclipsed the belly laughs. Anyone who can compare Reagan's funeral to "Weekend at Bernie's" and John Kerry to an Ent, one of Tolkien's talking trees, deserves an audience on both sides of the aisle.

Inspiration is running thin in comedian Margaret Cho's fourth concert film, a routine stand-up set that compares poorly to her oft-hilarious first two, continuing the preaching-to-converted mediocrity of last year's "CHO Revolution." Just serviceable as a vid-shot performance record, item looks to pass quickly through select urban hardtops before reaching more logical small screen destinations. Single-screen engagements in San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York City commence Sept. 2.
Having already mined her tumultuous S.F. youth and disastrous sitcom star launch, Cho seems to have run out of material -- either that or she's begun taking herself far too seriously as a spokesperson for the disgruntled left. Too much of this set is a desultory series of weak "So, what's in the news today?" jokes, predictably tapping aud outrage at "the most embarrassing President in history," etc. Largely gay following is catered to with many references to the gay marriage issue. But such hot topics stir surprisingly little comic invention, and Cho expresses her politics as crudely as the glibbest right-wing punditry. Bare-bones tech presentation and the usual bookending of she's-so-fabulous testimonials only underline the sense that this well has run dry.
Camera (color, DV), Bill Barber, David Insley, Mike Moser, Sovonto Green; editors, Adam Streit, Nancy Rosenblum; music, Paula Gallitano. Reviewed at Roxie Cinema, San Francisco, Aug. 22, 2005. Running time: 85 MIN. 
 


Bisexual Korean American comedian Margaret Cho  continues to damage the struggle of bisexual Korean American comedians fighting for the right to be gay and funny, gay married and funny, or straight, funny, and just a li'l bit gay, primarily by being mostly unfunny. Assassin  is the listless signature on her career-long comedic suicide note. The Notorious one sure is a fierce competitor, though. Endurance? Commitment? Please, homegirl makes Lance Armstrong  look like a pussy. LIVESTRONG? Try standing in front of a crowd for 80 minutes with her material and we'll see who deserves their own rubber bracelet. Cho does just that in Assassin , pandering to her LGBT audience with tired leads like "The last true diva was Cher  [wait for rapturous applause]." Surely queers worldwide don't even "Believe" in life after love anymore. Her embrace of controversial political topics might be welcome if her jokes weren't so predictable. Except for the one about Laura Bush 's coochie (speculatively) tasting like Lysol . Nope, didn't see that one coming.
