 There’s Matthew Barney’s world, then there’s the one that the rest of us inhabit, where Vaseline is strictly a salve for chapped lips and other rough bits, not a medium for artistic expression. In the aptly named documentary, “Matthew Barney: No Restraint,” we’re invited to observe this artist as he films his most recent project, “Drawing Restraint 9,” a love story in which he and his partner Bjork dress up, drink tea and transform into whales.  “Not many people can understand what is art,” says Masayuki Komatsu of the International Whaling Commission, who likens Mr. Barney to Picasso and welcomes the financial benefits of a project filmed at sea aboard a Japanese whaling vessel. Yet all is not smooth sailing as Mr. Barney attempts to explain his creative process while wrangling 45,000 pounds of petroleum jelly and a massive block of whale vomit.  Meanwhile the ship’s crew is suspicious of a meal consisting of whale-shaped entrees. “I’m nervous,” admits one unhappy sailor, gazing fearfully at a plate bearing  a gelatinous, black-and-white mass. One would think he would be.  Touching briefly on Mr. Barney’s early athletic and modeling pursuits, Alison Chernick’s film skims the surface of a strange and celebrated career. After a meager 72 minutes, the man who once stretched an obsession with testicles into a five-film cycle remains as unknowable as ever.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

Whatever auds might have wanted to know about sculptor-filmmaker Matthew Barney but were too embarrassed to ask is revealed in accessible docu "Matthew Barney: No Restraint." Helmer Alison Chernick literally gets on board the production of Barney's last effort, the whaling-ship-set "Drawing Restraint 9," to make something that's more than just a making-of docu. Pic reps an obvious second half for a double bill with "9" for limited-release runs in art-savvy burgs.
Best known for his five-part "visual opera" (the "Cremaster" series), Barney is arguably the most famous living experimental filmmaker still working. His sculptures, drawings and installations, which are closely related to his film oeuvre, sell for big money through the Barbara Gladstone gallery in Gotham, while the artist has a certain celebrity profile due to his good looks, manifest talent and marriage to Icelandic pop star Bjork, who co-stars in "Drawing Restraint 9" and appears here talking sense about her hubby's work.
A bit like a cinematic catalog for a gallery retrospective, "Matthew Barney: No Restraint" serves to explain Barney's m.o. to a wider aud by interviewing him, observing him at work on "Drawing Restraint 9" and showing archive footage of earlier projects and clips from the "Cremaster" cycle.
Auds who may have found the "Cremaster" movies beautiful but baffling and caught "Drawing Restraint 9," will experience numerous, "Aha! That's what he's talking about" moments here as Barney explains particular symbols in a no-nonsense way.
Chernick includes interviews with the Japanese workers aboard the Nisshin Maru, the boat featured in "Drawing Restraint 9," who seem bemused by the whole exercise. Helmer, whose previous docu explored the work of artist Jeff Koons, clearly has nothing but high regard for Barney, so no one says anything negative about him or his work onscreen here. The effect is not unlike an authorized biography.
Tech credits are OK, with the package simply assembled as if for TV or educational consumption.
 Camera (color, b&w, 16mm, HD-to-35mm) Toshiaki Ozawa, Robert Leacock; editors, Helen Yum, Aaron Lubarsky; music, Raz Mesina; sound (Dolby Digital), Bob Sacchetti; sound editor, Jeremiah Black; co-producer, Nadja Romain; Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama), Feb. 14, 2006. Running time: 70 MIN.
 


 
 


 

Matthew Barney  is big in Japan , notably so in Matthew Barney: No Restraint , Alison Chernick 's documentary companion to Barney's 2005 film Drawing Restraint 9 . Not merely an above-average "making-of" DVD extra, Chernick's film traces the creation of Barney's "narrative sculpture" with open curiosity and an alert, amiable eye. As Barney, the venerated athlete cum model cum artist cum bohemian jet-setter, filmed off the coast of Nagasaki  on a Japanese whaling vessel with his wife, co-star, and composer, Björk, Chernick plunged into the collaborative goo of the film's gestation; if indeed Barney's work strives to emphasize process over product, No Restraint  asserts itself as a vital and illuminating arm of his finished piece. And speaking of goo: If your inner four-year-old has ever longed to make a whale out of 45,000 pounds of Vaseline , Matt Barney 's your man. Chernick's footage of the polite but confused Japanese shipmen, enlisted in Barney's unrelentingly wacky shoot and earnestly pouring obscene amounts of liquid petroleum jelly into a huge steel mold (without a titter), speaks volumes about the ritual of deference Barney strove to capture in his film. In an interview, the politely bemused Japanese whaling commissioner admits that despite having no idea who either Barney or "Mrs. Björk" might be, he is happy to accommodate their bizarre requests; who is he to question art? If you, however, are bold enough to do so, Chernick's documentary (and her subject) eloquently trace Barney's inspiration and intention in a way that naturalizes rather than neuters them.
