The wording of the Special Jury Prize awarded at this year's Sundance Film Festival to Miranda July for her breathtaking feature debut, Me and You and Everyone We Know , is kind of klutzy — ''for originality of vision'' suggests a fashion-forward taste in eyewear rather than a superior quality of filmmaking. But it'll have to do, since definition eludes the delicate pleasures of this marvelous, idiosyncratic movie collage — the best drama I saw at Sundance — from a doe-eyed artist whose projects to date have jumped from radio plays to short stories to performance pieces to interactive video art. (Even her name sounds like a piece of fiction or a one-act play.) In Me and You , July's theme is the human longing for connection, distilled into a handful of touching, weird, everyday trial-and-error encounters among a collection of interrelated characters who could exist only in — well, in a Miranda July story. The filmmaker herself plays a video artist (she drives elderly people in a taxi service to pay the rent) who is attracted to a shoe salesman (Deadwood 's John Hawkes) raising two boys after having separated from his wife. And I can't even begin to describe the bizarro yet tenderly ordinary happenstances that befall the boys, the most extraordinary of which involves that powerful identity-disguising phenomenon, the online chat room. And the word poop.
July's handmade movie is so unique and so true to the artist's elementally feminine self, both in form and in content (it also picked up a batch of awards at Cannes), that it's impossible not to respond strongly to it. Or, heck, against it, if that's what her originality of vision evokes. Either way, hers is an artwork not to be missed.

The inclusive title of polymath Miranda July 's first feature film is apt for a multimedia artist who has often sought to forge virtual communities through her work. Her Joanie 4 Jackie chain letter video project generated a cheap distribution network for unaffiliated female filmmakers, while on learningtoloveyoumore.com, July and collaborator Harrell Fletcher concoct offbeat art class homework ("Make a paper replica of your bed") and post the results—every assignment begets its own online group show. In the beguiling ensemble Me and You and Everyone We Know , July measures the distances between people in a suburban Los Angeles neighborhood and knits together cockeyed comedies of attraction and repulsion. A prizewinner at Sundance and Cannes , July's witty ode to only-connecting sustains a delicate tone of pensive whimsy.
The film's focal points—perhaps even its Me  and You —are a pair of dazed, searching outsiders lacking a certain We . Earnest, goofy video artist Christine (played by July) is trying to nudge a foot in the door at the local Center for Contemporary Art , but even once she penetrates the fortress, she can't get her work-sample tape into the hands of the standoffish director. (Is it ironic or only fitting that art-world superstar July finds her most piquant sample of enforced estrangement inside a gallery?) Meanwhile, frazzled shoe salesman Richard (a superb John Hawkes ) is splitting with his wife and moving out of the house they share with their Internet-glued kids, Peter (Miles Thompson ) and Robby (Brandon Ratcliff ). The separation appears amicable enough, but bewildered Richard is badly unmoored, appearing at his sons' bedroom door like a vagrant, wild-eyed supplicant ("Do I look well to you guys?") and setting fire to his hand on the front lawn, as if trying to invent an ancient Ceremony of the Broken Home.
The attractions of impromptu ritual are a constant in Me and You , in the incantatory recitations Christine records for her videos, the last rites she gives to a doomed goldfish, and the solo mating dances she performs at the margins of the shoe department—flashing the reflected light of a compact mirror toward an unwitting Richard or attaching ornamental socks to her ears. Any tenuous offer of an emotional or sexual bond is treated like a dangerous dare. Richard and Christine finally exchange some flirtatious banter—imagining the sidewalk beneath their feet as a timeline of their hypothetical relationship—but he's angered when she jumps impetuously into his car; Richard's jolly colleague Andrew (Brad Henke) affixes lurid come-ons to the windows of his house but hides in panic when teenage neighbors Rebecca (Najarra Townsend ) and Heather (Natasha Slayton ) call his bluff.
Trying on their nascent feminine wiles and seeing how they fit, Rebecca and Heather also enlist doleful Peter as judge in a fellatio competition, while little Robby wins a passionate online admirer when he pens a surely unprecedented coprophiliac fantasy. As she proved in her bracing video Nest of Tens  (2000), July ascribes sexuality to persons under the age of consent without coyness or moral hectoring. And while Peter and Robby's pain and alienation following their parents' breakup are evident, Me and You  absorbs rather than underlines them and refuses to sentimentalize the flexible forbearance of youth. When a regular customer asks after Richard's boys and coos fatuously that kids are "so adaptable," Richard replies, with weary self-indictment, "Yes, well, they have absolutely no control over their own lives, so . . . "
Crisply photographed by Chuy Chavez  and buoyed by winsome beep-and-buzz keyboards on the soundtrack, Me and You  proceeds with childlike discursiveness. The film conjures a heightened reality where characters verbalize their thoughts, desires, and impulses without submitting them to the usual filters first; July takes in their foibles unblinkingly and folds them into an awkward, heartfelt embrace.
