 “Everything about being indie is tied to not being black,” says Micah (Wyatt Cenac), half of the accidental kind-of couple whose one-day romance is chronicled in “Medicine for Melancholy.” He is making an observation — and also registering a complaint — about the quasi-bohemian way of life he shares with Jo’ (Tracey Heggins), his temporary other half. It bothers Micah that their embrace of the folkways of urban hipsterism seems to require the suppression of their African-American identity.  But his words, which Jo’ doesn’t quite agree with, also suggest a degree of self-awareness, and self-questioning, on the part of Barry Jenkins, who wrote and directed this small, incisive film. Most recent movies about culturally savvy, affectless 20-somethings hooking up and being cool are very much tied to not being black. They are about diffident, underemployed white boys and the women who (sometimes inexplicably) go to bed with them.  It wouldn’t be entirely fair to say that Mr. Jenkins, a 29-year-old director whose immersion in movie history is both ardent and understated, is making a black version of a Joe Swanberg or Andrew Bujalski film, or even, to stretch the comparisons a bit further back, a mash-up of “Before Sunrise” and “She’s Gotta Have  It.” But it wouldn’t be entirely inaccurate, either, because the tricky questions that govern “Medicine for Melancholy” are how, why and to what extent race should matter in relationships between black men and women.  At one point Micah asks Jo’ if her live-in boyfriend (conveniently overseas on a business trip) is white. “Does it matter?” she asks him.  “Yes and no,” he says, and his ambivalence is both the theme of the movie and a crucial element of its curious, ruminative attitudes toward love, race and urban life.  We first meet Micah and Jo’ in a bed that belongs to neither of them, where they have awakened  together on the morning after a party. Both act shy and embarrassed, and Jo’ seems in a particular hurry to put this brief encounter behind her. Micah, though, proposes breakfast and a shared cab ride home, which Jo’ accepts more out of fatigue and some sense of post-coital decorum than out of genuine interest.  Micah tries to counter her aloofness with low-key humor, and when Jo’ leaves her wallet in the taxi,  he tracks her down, bicycling from his apartment in the  Tenderloin district of San Francisco to her place in the Marina.  “Medicine for Melancholy” is a two-hander, occupied entirely with the day Jo’ and Micah spend together, chatting, flirting, arguing and seeing the sights of San Francisco. But the city’s lovingly captured neighborhoods (shot by James Laxton in high-definition digital video from which all but the faintest hints of color have been drained) make the story as much a love triangle as a romance.  Micah, a native San Franciscan, is acutely aware of —  Jo’ might say obsessed with —  the demographic changes that have accompanied the city’s recent boom. He grieves over the attrition of the black population, which he says has shrunk to only 7 percent, and fears that gentrification will destroy his hometown’s free, democratic spirit. In a quietly illuminating documentary digression, he and Jo’ pause in their wandering to listen to a group of housing-rights activists.  Micah’s sense of politics and place, as much as the color of his skin, distinguishes  him from other mumblecore characters, who traipse through cool, scruffy parts of various cities indifferent to the history that surrounds them and the social contradictions that ensnare them. Mr. Jenkins’s spirit is exploratory rather than didactic. Micah is neither a saint nor a mouthpiece, but a young guy with sometimes confused motives and ideas. At first his race-conscious riffs sound, to Jo’ and the audience, like pick-up lines, as if he were trying to guilt-trip her back into bed with him.  And to some extent they might be. Mr. Cenac, a writer and fake reporter on “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,” calibrates Micah’s vacillations between earnestness and guardedness perfectly. Ms. Heggins’s character is less developed. We know Jo’ is a cinephile, currently unemployed and a transplant to the Bay Area, but she never fully emerges as either a foil or a possible soul mate for Micah.  But that may be Jo’s choice as much as the filmmaker’s. There are no simple answers or obvious conclusions to be gleaned from this movie, which, like its soundtrack, is both sad and vibrant, meandering and formally sure-footed. It is an exciting debut, and a film that, without exaggeration or false modesty, finds interest and feeling in the world just as it is.
"How do you define yourself?" It's not until its third act that Medicine for  Melancholy 's lead male character explicitly asks the question that's at this film's heart. Throughout its near-90-minute running time, writer-director Barry Jenkins 's tender, smart, soulful movie gracefully places the emphasizing weight of inflection on each word in the query, then subtly shifts that weight so that the answer being sought (what black is; what black ain't) is itself a morphing, complicated thing. That's fitting for a film that is pointedly and poetically about race, gentrification, and the emotional temperature of the modern Afro-American—or at least one subset of that demographic. When Micah (The Daily Show  's Wyatt Cenac ), said male lead, states that his definition of self is partly predicated on how the world sees and treats him, 'Jo (Tracey Heggins ), the female lead and also black, fires back an exasperated, "Who gives a shit what society thinks?"
Micah, whose jeans neither hug his nuts nor sag off his ass, is a doe-eyed, seemingly laid-back San Francisco native who installs aquariums for a living (and looks like a lost member of Pharcyde ). The soothing quality of those burbling tanks is reflected somehow in his core personality, but Micah also seethes about the fact that his hometown is rapidly and not incidentally being emptied of black folks. When he and 'Jo—initially aloof, charming when thawed—awaken in the same bed after a friend's party, neither knowing the other's name, she's determined to do her walk of shame. Micah's too smitten, though, to just let her get away. The rest of the film—gorgeously shot in black and white by James Laxton —follows as the duo spends the day (and another night) peeling back the layers in conversations that cover interracial relationships, striking the balance between what you do  and how you pay the bills and the role of "urban planning" in pushing poor and black folk out of San Francisco. "Imagine the Lower Haight ," says Micah, recalling his childhood, "filled with nothing but black folk and white artists." The lament will resonate from San Francisco to D.C., Los Angeles to Harlem, as enclaves that were once hubs of black American life are drained of their blackness.
The script's politics sound didactic in the listing, and they're moving in the execution. Jenkins's dialogue is crisp and witty, sounding and flowing the way real people speak. But it's also shrewdly nuanced. When the duo banters on about why Black History Month is February, Micah takes the familiar position that it's because February is the shortest month of the year. 'Jo's rebuttal, parlayed in the coolest of tones, not only counters with hard facts but also suggests a class schism between the two that plays out in ways small (wine storage) and large (the neighborhoods they live in). Part of the film's powerful emotion, though, lies in the stretches of silence between characters, when there's just ambient noise—the trickling of a park waterfall, the sound of traffic floating up into an open apartment window—as Laxton's camera pulls in tight on a face or hangs tough as the couple walks down the sidewalk. Jenkins has joked in interviews that the film is black mumblecore, and it is, but with an intensity of purpose often lacking in that movement.
There are two other major characters in the film: the city of San Francisco and the film's indie rock soundtrack. Jenkins has cited the great French filmmaker Claire Denis  as one of his influences, and it shows in the way he incorporates his intoxicating landscape into the narrative and into his characters' psyches, showing the connection between identity and geography. In contemporary pop culture, that connection is frequently drawn in rap. The music in Medicine , however, is indie rock, and that's not accidental. At one point, Micah delineates the isolation he feels by breaking down the 7 percent of black folks left in San Francisco into those who are into "punk, folk, or whatever you don't see on BET." In a drunken rant, he fumes that "Everything about being indie is tied to not being black." His love of indie music, however, is not a desire to escape or deny blackness: Immersion in a scene whose default setting is "white" is paradoxically rooted in his hunger to embody and live a more complex, dynamic blackness than that which pop barons market. The irony crushes him.
