
The Pang brothers, Danny and Oxide, arrive on American screens with high and horrific expectations, trailing a bloody body of Hong Kong ghost stories (like 2002's "The Eye") that the twins have written and directed. A New York Times
 magazine profile last summer bumped the hype up a notch.
That all this has resulted in "The Messengers," a stylish but almost completely generic thriller, is as anticlimactic as the movie itself. It's good for scaring 14-year-old girls and impressing budding cinematographers, and that, friends, is it.
The Solomon family has moved from the big city to the creepy country as the film opens: Dad (Dylan McDermott) has dreams of being a sunflower farmer -- he's eyeing the lucrative Major League Baseball market, I guess -- while uptight mom (Penelope Ann Miller) irons compulsively and tries to smile without pulling a muscle. Teenage daughter Jess (Kristen Stewart) glowers like a junior league Avril Lavigne: no one understands her because she speaks in fluent pout. There's a toddler, too, named Benny (Evan Turner), who's a magnet for rotting spirits.
The farmhouse is vintage Texas Chainsaw, the crows in full murder, creepy gray things are skittering in the basement. The scariest thing here, though, has to be John Corbett ("My Big Fat Greek Wedding"), with long hair and a skeevy fu manchu, as a stranger who shows up at the house wielding a shotgun. Naturally, the dad immediately hires him on as a farmhand.
The Pangs are more into atmosphere and imagery than in plot logic, and that's fine; if only their bag of tricks weren't so shallow. They're big on "boo" scenes and playing with focal planes: something icky is always passing by in the foreground or background of a shot as the soundtrack gooses you with sonic whooshes.
It's a wholly mechanical approach to suspense, and after a while you sit there in the dark and tick off the other movies that have been scavenged for spare parts: "The Amityville Horror," "The Shining," "The Birds," "The Others," "The Sixth Sense," even a little bit of "Close Encounters" whenever baby Benny wanders down a hall toward a shrieking door.
Stewart -- Jodie Foster's daughter in "Panic Room" -- is a good actress who's been directed to give a binary performance: she toggles between sullen and scared. The grown-ups fare worse: They speak . . . very . . . slowly . . . as if to pad the running time out. This may in fact be the most ridiculous performance John Corbett has ever given.
The visuals stick with you -- a pair of mottled ghost-legs that appear under a sheet the mother is shaking out, for instance -- and somewhere in "The Messengers" is a neat little metaphor about all the things a teenager sees and feels that no one wants to hear about. For subtext to work, though, you have to have some text on top of it. Instead, "The Messengers" is textbook, and the course it's teaching is HSL: Horror as a Second Language.


Asian-style horror-movie ghouls tend to come in three varieties, and you'll find 'em all in The Messengers , an unoriginal haunted-farmhouse flick representing the Hollywood debut of twin Hong Kong directors Danny and Oxide Pang. First, there's the pale kid with white-orb eyes. Next, there's the slow-moving ghoul 혰 typically female 혰 who either lurks in the back of the frame or else colludes with the editor to pop up right in your face. And then there's the crawler: When Asian movie ghouls move fast, for some reason they're usually on all fours.
The Asian-horror-movie moment feels long since passed, both here and abroad. Let our zombies walk or even sprint again! Give our creepy kids back their pupils! There are a few decent jolts in The Messengers , but every one of them is accompanied by a cheap freak-out on the soundtrack so you know to be decently jolted. The story kicks off when Dylan McDermott moves his family 혰 including a mute toddler who likes to point his stubby finger at freaky stuff 혰 into a North Dakota house that looks half burned down, and the movie only makes less sense from there. Soon his teen daughter (Kristen Stewart) is seeing things her parents cannot, like a pair of blue hands coming at her out of quicksand in the basement. Her parents think she's crazy, and since she glumly sticks around for more, maybe she is. Why is the girl not scared? Perhaps she's seen too many horror movies?


The Pang brothers' signature visual pizzazz is strongly displayed in their first Hollywood studio production, "The Messengers," a haunted farmhouse story boasting excellent atmospherics. Oxide and Danny Pang's trademark spins on composition, timing and special effects, though hardly groundbreaking (and sometimes downright imitative), are impressively, even joyfully rendered, as if inviting viewer complicity. Unfortunately, this playful artistry seldom jibes with the forced family values plotline. The Pangs painfully hew to a vision of an idealized Americana with the "happy ending" coming off as especially egregious. Pic's success will depend on auds' willingness to sacrifice narrative cohesion for an elegant and scary funhouse ride.
Pic's black-and-white pre-credit sequence, the bloody slaughter of a farm family by unseen hands, plays out in intriguingly fragmented form. Though replete with rather corny horror tropes -- crows broodingly roosting on the rooftop, a terrified child clutching his favorite toy as he huddles in a cupboard -- these scenes are remarkably and tersely effective.
The present day arrives, amped up to full color, and the Solomons enter, having just bought the murdered family's farm in a last-ditch effort to save their clan from economic (and personal) disaster.
Pic centers around Jess (Kristen Stewart), the teenage daughter of the Solomon brood. Coyly dropped hints make it clear that her father (Dylan McDermott) and mother (Penelope Ann Miller) have never really forgiven her for whatever disaster has brought the Chicago family to this run-down North Dakota farmhouse. (Film was shot near Regina, Saskatchewan.) A helpful passing stranger with a gun (John Corbett) is hired on to round out the household.
The farm is a template of spookiness, with slamming doors, fingernail scratches on the floor and mysterious signs and shapes. At first, only mute toddler Ben (Evan/Theodore Turner) can see the decomposing ghosts that float or skitter and scuttle around the walls and ceilings, following them with his eyes and pointing up at them with wonder and delight.
Jess' as-yet-unspecified sin guarantees that once she catches on and confronts the dark forces, with spectacularly destructive results, no one will believe her.
The Pangs bring on a whole panoply of both Asian and American ghostly bells and whistles with restrained panache, oozing ectoplasm or choreographing darting shapes only on the margins of the frame, while ominous camera movements effectively ratchet up suspense. They have a knack for fast-edited, sound-amplified "gotcha" moments, and deliberately stretched-out plays with space and time, taunting viewers by consciously withholding reverse-angles or tweaking sudden perspective-shifts.
Jittery cross-cutting between black-and-white past terrors and present color threats mesh the two timeframes with surprising vigor. Yet, despite fine thesping by all concerned, the violence of the past never convincingly resonates in the clumsily developed family dynamics of the present.
Jess' screw-up in Chicago, when it is finally revealed, proves a huge anticlimax that seems totally irrelevant to the ghost story. For their part, the ghosts' sole motives are to indiscriminately grab anyone who ventures into their purview.
Unlike the genre touchstones that pic references (a pitchfork replaces Jack Nicholson's axe in a "Shining"-like rampage, while a crow attack is an outright homage, if not a steal, from "The Birds"), pic's morally-loaded tales of family redemption seems artificially pasted onto its evocative spook play.
Though the Pangs prove culturally adaptive on a visual level (Stewart's angular face, lacking the smooth impenetrability of Asian girls' visages, is asymmetrically and cubistically framed, creating a more nervous form of otherworldly awareness), they seem completely clueless as to the tonal modalities of Mark Wheaton's admittedly undercooked, all-American script.
Pic production team includes Sam Raimi (whose "Evil Dead" classics are sporadically evoked) and Joseph Drake (producer of "The Grudge"), but no one managed to bridge the gap between script and direction in this uneven outing. Tech credits are pro.
