he words of that perky little jingle proclaiming "We're all connected!" can cut both ways. As you watch Joe Maggio's film "Milk and Honey," whose characters are linked by a preposterous chain of coincidence, you may ask yourself: why feel connected to the self-pitying, deceitful yuppies who rant and bellyache through this sour little film? "Milk and Honey" is the kind of nightmare-in-a-box you might expect if Neil LaBute remade Martin Scorsese's "After Hours" on a shoestring. A downbeat urban parable that zigzags around New York City and eastern New Jersey, it is chillingly accurate at some moments but strained and manipulative at many others. The main character, Rick Johnson (Clint Jordan), is an upscale monster of an especially repellent sort. A wealthy, troubled stockbroker with a history of mental disorder, he is first seen haranguing his wife, Joyce (Kirsten Russell), as they put the final touches on a welcome-home party for his office mates following Rick's recent discharge from a mental institution. Joyce quite reasonably suggests to Rick that he resume taking his medication (Paxil). But if he did, we would have no movie. At the predictably disastrous bash, Rick gets stinking drunk and attacks his boss, and the guests flee after Joyce turns down a $20,000 re-engagement ring he ostentatiously presents. Caught in a spiraling rage, he barges in on his therapist (Greg Amici), then pays an unannounced visit to his on-again, off-again girlfriend, Katie (Eleanor Hutchins). A nasty piece of work, she has recently fixed up her new apartment (found through the obituaries), unaware that its previous occupant was Joyce's drug-addicted, deceased lover. Rick's next grab for attention, at an all-night diner, is to insult an African-American man, who beats him up. Suicidally depressed, he returns to offer the man, Moses Jackson (Dudley Findlay Jr.), the re-engagement ring in return for killing him. Joyce, meanwhile, embarks on her own all-nighter and ends up going home with Tony (Anthony Howard), a weepy exhibitionist and dead ringer for her ex-lover, who confuses stripping in public with performance art. "Milk and Honey" is pungently acted, and to its credit, the cast doesn't shy away from embodying largely unsympathetic characters. But the story is so contrived that not one believable character emerges from the maze. A major culprit is that chain of coincidence, conceptually clever on paper perhaps, but false and trite in its execution.

Writer-director Joe Maggio, who made a mark with his 2001 debut "Virgil Bliss," again coaxes edgy performances from an ensemble cast in "Milk & Honey," a dexterously scripted, darkly humorous account of a New York couple's all-night odyssey of spiraling anxiety as they struggle to keep a grip on reality and their severely damaged relationship. While the agitated shooting style suits the material, the poor-quality, drab DV visuals represent a commercial stumbling block, probably limiting exposure to fest and cable dates.
Writer-director Joe Maggio, who made a mark with his 2001 debut "Virgil Bliss," again coaxes edgy performances from an ensemble cast in "Milk & Honey," a dexterously scripted, darkly humorous account of a New York couple's all-night odyssey of spiraling anxiety as they struggle to keep a grip on reality and their severely damaged relationship. While the agitated shooting style suits the material, the poor-quality, drab DV visuals represent a commercial stumbling block, probably limiting exposure to fest and cable dates.

Core of the drama is the imploding marriage of Rick (Clint Jordan) and Joyce (Kirsten Russell), following a disastrous party intended to reintroduce him to professional colleagues after what appears to have been a breakdown. Rick hits the streets, bouncing from his girlfriend to his shrink to a stranger, to whom he offers payment to end his life, while Joyce also ventures out for her own confrontations. Benefiting from another strong collaboration between the director and "Virgil Bliss" lead Jordan, Maggio's intricately interwoven tale has a certain eccentric affectation that recalls the films of Hal Hartley, who composed the austere score.
Camera (color, digital video), Gordon Chou; editor, Seth E. Anderson; music, Hal Hartley, Yo La Tengo, Fischerspooner; production designer, Bryce Paul Mama; art director, Nick Stavrides. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (American Spectrum), Jan. 18, 2003. Running time: 91 MIN.
 


Omarova's film is full of lazy padding (walks on the beach, staring out of windows), but she has a decrepitly beautiful, nearly post-apocalyptic Soviet-scrap landscape to roam through, littered with rusting machinery and stray dogs and monstrous public works decaying into the earth. Unfortunately, Schizo's familiar trials could have, and have, played out anywhere else. Some Central Asian movie could put this dead-empire-skeleton geography to use as a spectacularly metaphoric film set, but we haven't seen it happen yet.
