         The swirl of bad girl shenanigans, Hollywood satire and noir-ish melodrama in "Mini's First Time" that was intended to make for an icy cocktail of prurience and moral insight tastes more like freezer burn instead.
 
 It's ostensibly a dark comedy of negligent parenting that turns the smirky, sexually adventurous teen daughter (Nikki Reed) of a coked-up, never-was actress (Carrie-Anne Moss) into a conspiring playmate for her vengeance-seeking stepfather (Alec Baldwin).
 


         






   But it more often exposes the laziness of writer-director Nick Guthe, who is all influences — "American Beauty," "Lolita," "The Opposite of Sex," James M. Cain novels — and little originality. The first half-hour is wackadoodle enough in its high-gloss, low-taste scene-setting to suggest an Adrian Lyne-directed "Mean Girls." That's because among the "firsts" that Mini wants to try — new experience is her mantra — is, naturally, prostitution. (Only a movie like this could think the world's oldest professional cliché, women playing hookers, feels like a first.) But when her debut john turns out to be Baldwin's character, a plot is hatched to drive his wife, Mini's mom, around the bend, with tragic results.
 
 Eventually, a dogged detective (Luke Wilson) starts sniffing around, and a movie whose only hope had been camp classic becomes poisonously dull, as scheme unravelings often do in these types of tales. The actors' lot is one of unfortunate misuse. Reed may have cornered a segment of the market on lipsticked sirenhood after "Thirteen," but blown up to lead size, she's no Barbara Stanwyck. And tamping down a felicitously devilish actor like Baldwin just seems criminal.
 
 But Guthe doesn't even grasp that Moss — getting some solidly cutting laughs from her embittered pleasure seeker — is his most interesting creation, worthy of a full-fledged satire of ill-advised mothering. The movie never recovers from her ignominious (and disturbingly cruel) exit. Then it just falls back into the kind of snap-on Beverly Hills culture cynicism that, unlike what the title implies, feels like the 116th time.
 
 Mini's First Time'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for strong sexual content, language, drug use and a scene of violence.
 
 A First Independent Pictures release. Writer-director Nick Guthe. Producers Kevin Spacey, Dana Brunetti, Edward Bass, Evan Astrowsky. Director of photography Daniel Stoloff. Editor Michael Ruscio. Running time: 1 hour, 31 minutes.
 
 Exclusively at Pacific's ArcLight, 6360 W. Sunset Blvd. (at Ivar Avenue), (323) 464-4226; Laemmle's Playhouse 7, 673 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena, (626) 844-6500; Mann Criterion 6, 1313 Third St. Promenade, Santa Monica, (310) 395-1599;
 
 Pacific Sherman Oaks 5, 14424 Millbank St., Sherman Oaks, (818) 501-5121.   


A venomous bonbon filled with black-hearted satire, "Mini's First Time" is a comedy about cynical opportunism, self-interest and how to be a successful sociopath. Appeal should be across the board, but especially among auds with a taste for the sardonic. 
There's very little here in the way of redemptive morality; the downward trajectory of the ensemble resembles the choreography of a parachute team. Part of "Mini's" charm, in fact, may be in its single-minded devotion to the utterly depraved and comically debauched.
Mixing elements of "Gaslight," "Double Indemnity" and "Clueless," writer-director Nick Guthe's first feature offers a heroine of very dubious appeal: Mini (Nikki Reed), a high school sex-bomb whose passion is doing things she's never done before -- in other words, having "firsts." When she decides to try prostitution, one of her first clients turns out to be her stepfather, Martin (Alec Baldwin).
One thing leads to another, and the two are soon plotting to drive Mini's mother, Diane (a terrific Carrie-Anne Moss), crazy, have her committed and avoid the repercussions that would be brought on by Martin and Diane's prenuptial agreement. But things, as they will, get out of hand.
The performances lift "Mini" out of the gutter of utter cynicism and into the realm of the complex. Reed's antiheroine is pure opportunist, but Baldwin's Martin is a half sophisticate/half patsy who watches himself being led down the garden path as if he were having an out-of-body experience.
Moss, playing the ungratifying role of Mini's angry, drink-addled mother, manages to wring enough sympathy out of the character to keep her from becoming a suburban cartoon.
Production values are first-rate, notably Linda Burton's production design and Dan Stoloff's camera work. Composer Cato's music is solid, too, though it occasionally borrows from the Thomas Newman/"American Beauty" sense of the ethereal.
Luke Wilson and Jeff Goldblum, playing a detective and leering neighbor, respectively, are here to play Luke Wilson and Jeff Goldblum.

Remember when the presence of Alec Baldwin  and Jeff Goldblum  was a decent guarantee of a pretty good movie? It's been a while. Here, they both play second fiddle to the omnipresent voiceover narration and bikini-clad bod of Thirteen 's Nikki Reed , reprising her shtick as a dangerous delinquent, here determined to undertake as many different first-time experiences as possible, including murder. Reed's Mini is the latchkey kid of Hollywood  failures, with a mom (Carrie-Anne Moss , reprising her Chumscrubber  role) who drinks herself into oblivion and a stepfather (Baldwin) who hires hookers. When Mini herself turns to tricks, a coincidental meeting turns her stepdad into her lover. Mini is impossible to like, especially since she delivers some of the worst narration ever spoken, and her final lines are like a big middle finger to viewers foolish enough to enjoy the film. Only Goldblum, as a creepy neighbor, commands any attention, with bits that feel like they were completely improvised, or brought in from a different story.
