         A great Modernist gets conventionally romanticized in Mick Davis' 'Modigliani.' In "Modigliani," Andy Garcia plays the Italian painter Amedeo Modigliani, major figure in European Modernism, tubercular party animal and fixture of the Montparnasse cafe circuit in the early part of the 20th century. Scottish director Mick Davis has likened 1919 Paris to "the rock and roll of that time." And if a portrait of the artist as a proto-David Lee Roth appeals, then "Modigliani" is for you.
 
  Davis isn't the first to be seduced by the connection between artistic genius and hedonistic excess. (Modigliani, "Modi" to friends, enjoyed smoking hash, drinking naked and brawling.) Nor is he the first to be attracted to the notion of a community of 24-hour bohemian party people. But I'm pretty sure he's the first to depict Pablo Picasso as a precursor to Jon Lovitz, and Utrillo, Soutine and Rivera as the Three Stooges.
 


         






    Modigliani may have been noted for his drunken volatility and arrogance, but once you get a dozen years or so of "Behind the Musics" and "E! True Hollywood Stories" behind you, it's hard to get worked up about that sort of thing anymore. As Garcia plays him, Modi is the kind of monster-of-rock who swaggers into a cafe and immediately elicits sighs, murmurs and spontaneous applause. He doesn't trash hotel rooms, but close. In an early scene, he's introduced to a wealthy New York art dealer described by a lover as having "a lot of money, but no taste." When the dealer expresses an interest in his work, the artist flings the money in his face and stalks out of the room. (The gesture is especially baffling, not only because it would suggest a degree of low self-esteem not otherwise evident in Garcia's portrayal, but because the chronically ill, not-yet-famous Modigliani was as hard up as they came.)
 
  The story loosely spans the last three years of the artist's life, from his first meeting with the young art student Jeanne Hebuterne (played by Elsa Zylberstein, a swan-necked French actress who bears a striking resemblance to a Modigliani portrait) in 1917 to their deaths in 1920. It was a hectic period, which Davis loosely scrambles and compresses for the sake of expediency. The couple produced a daughter, Modi's health steadily declined, his first solo show was shut down by the police, he expired and Jeanne, eight months pregnant with their second, flung herself from a window the following day.
 
  Apparently surmising this was not quite drama enough for a movie, Davis has devoted a large portion of the film to a mostly invented rivalry between Modi and Picasso, who go mano
 a
 mano
 for the top cash prize in the "Salon des Artistes." (This may be a reference to Modigliani's inclusion in the Salon d'Automne in the final months of his life, one of several important group exhibitions throughout Europe that included Modigliani's work in his lifetime.) In between bouts of drinking and getting up in the grill of Jeanne's father — here a symbol for all the anti-Semitism in Paris — Modi prepares for his big face-off with the famous Spaniard, played by Omid Djalili as a petulant buffoon in a bad rug. (For her portrayal of Picasso's Russian wife, Olga, supermodel Eva Herzigova borrows heavily from Natasha of "Rocky & Bullwinkle," and Romania stands in for Paris, unconvincingly.)
 
  Davis takes pains to infuse the solitary and introspective act of painting with as much testosterone as possible, a move that culminates in an unfortunate painting-as-sex montage set to a techno-chorale in which Rivera, Utrillo, Soutine and Modigliani climax simultaneously.
 
  Deeply silly and tendentious, "Modigliani" is a sincere attempt to construct a myth from shopworn notions about artistic genius that isn't made any fresher by lines like the one the unwed teen mother Jeanne lays on a priest. "Forgive me father, I fell in love, is that a sin?"
 
  To which the priest, who must have just wandered in from the church of Hallmark down the street, replies, "No, my dear, the sin would be not to have loved at all."
 
  Scenes like these are a disservice to the memory of a painter as talented and interesting as Modigliani, who unlike Picasso doesn't have dozens of alternate portrayals to counter the image of himself suddenly channeling De Niro and leaning into his father-in-law's ear to snarl, "Grandpapa, I'll be watching you." But what's done is done. As Jeanne's mother says, "You can't change destiny." I'm not sure what that means, but it sure sounds like art.
 
 'Modigliani'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for some language and drug use
 
 Times guidelines:
 The usual famous-artist debauchery, conventionally romanticized
 
 Distributed by Bauer Martinez Studios. Director Mick Davis. Producer Philippe Martinez, Stephanie Martinez, Andre Djaoui, Alan Latham. Screenplay by Mick Davis. Running time: 2 hours, 8 minutes.   


Some of the enormous drama inherent in the life of sculptor and painter Modigliani is captured in Mick Davis' film of the same name that concentrates on the final year of the artist's life in Paris. But thoughtful production design and casting of Andy Garcia in the title role, along with looks-just-right Elsa Zylberstein as his long-suffering muse, can't overcome a didactic script. Failing to invest famous characters with the depth to break free of a made-for-TV feel, earnest misfire does make one want to read up on the real Modigliani. Theatrical prospects look modest, with Jewish fests a lock.
In Paris in the late teens, the competitive animosity between still-struggling Amedeo Modigliani (Garcia) and already successful Pablo Picasso (Omid Djalili) takes center stage. Running parallel is the obsessive love of well-born Jeanne Hebuterne (Zylberstein) for the penniless Italian she calls "Modi."
When Jeanne has his child out of wedlock, her rigid Catholic father threatens to give the baby up for adoption unless his daughter makes a clean break from the Jewish painter. But, great loves and great art were all the rage in Paris after World War I.
Irreverent and impetuous Modi lives in squalor and courts disaster by drinking absinthe despite the ravages of TB. Diego Rivera, Gertrude Stein, Jean Cocteau, Utrillo (Hippolyte Girardot), Kisling, Soutine, Picasso and Picasso's then-wife Olga (Eva Herzigova) pop in and out, lurching from desperate or cruel situation to, uh, desperate or cruel situation.
Narrative's central question is whether Modi and Picasso will relent and sign up for the one-canvas-takes-all Salon des Artistes competition. Although Modi desperately needs the cash prize -- Jeanne is pregnant again -- he is too proud to participate. Or is he?
One of pic's most arresting scenes is a flashback set in Modigliani's hometown of Livorno, Italy, when he was a boy. As government officials try to confiscate the family's belongings for back taxes, the clan invokes an ancient custom proclaiming any possessions on a pregnant woman's bed may not be seized: The young Amedeo's mother is in labor with furniture and chandeliers piled up on her mattress.
Another memorable scene has Picasso -- the proud owner of a flashy motorcar -- drive his artistic rival to the country to meet 'God": the elderly Auguste Renoir.
All set pieces and forced intensity, pic never really settles into a rhythm conducive to suspension of disbelief. Desaturated color perversely calls attention to itself instead of facilitating the process of stepping back in time.
Romania fills in reasonably well for Montparnasse, but Davis' hand simply is not sure enough to bring a bygone era fully to life. James Ivory's "Surviving Picasso" or even Alan Rudolph's "The Moderns" had far more spark, although it may be true that films about European artistic communities where all thesps speak English -- with or without an "accent" -- rarely convince.
That said, Hippolyte Girardot is touching as Modi's close pal Utrillo, who lands in a genuinely creepy loony bin. As the oval-faced, swan-necked Jeanne of countless portraits, Zylberstein -- who has thesped up a storm in the past year and is rarely absent from Paris hardtops -- is as crafty a physical fit as Shelly Duvall was as Olive Oyl.
The usually more versatile Garcia fills Modi's trademark corduroy suit with a measure of pauper's panache. But his Brave Face 101 proves too smiley to convey the hurt-laced ambition that gnaws at Modigliani's doomed, self-destructive soul. Initially jarring, Djalili's Picasso gathers steam.
Irritating musical score is all wrong; it would be worth seeing if the film improves simply by suppressing it.
Camera (color), Emmanuel Kadosh; editor, Emma E. Hickox; music, Guy Farley; production designer, Giantito Burchiellaro; costume designer, Pam Downe; associate producers, Stephan Jonas, Andrei Boncea, Antonio Guadalupi, Roberto Bessi, Patrick Godeau. Reviewed at Club Marbeuf screening room, Paris, Aug 31, 2004. (In Toronto Film Festival -- Gala.) Running time: 126 MIN.
 

