
Romance, creativity, subterfuge and repartee are among the pleasures to be had in "Moliere," a consistently diverting, bittersweet costumer about what might have transpired during an early gap in the playwright's known whereabouts. Speculative pic on how Gaul's answer to Shakespeare found inspiration in an involuntary gig giving a nobleman acting lessons is sumptuous, touching and often laugh-out-loud funny. Former film journo Laurent Tirard (2004's "The Story of My Life") avoids the sophomore slump with this smart and assured confection. Specialized offshore distribs should sharpen their quills to ink contracts apace.
Opening credits, in which embroidered fabrics undulate in slow motion to a jauntily majestic score, set the tone. It's 1658, and playwright/actor Jean-Baptiste Poquelin (Romain Duris) -- aka Moliere -- returns to Paris with his theater troupe after 13 years honing their craft on tour in the sticks. Farces have made their reputation, and the king has given them a theater in the capital. But Moliere wants to switch to more serious fare: He believes only tragedy is true theater.
However, soon after being summoned to the deathbed of an unseen woman, Moliere announces to his players that rehearsals for their next production -- a comedy, after all -- will begin the next day.
Action then switches to 13 years earlier. Young Moliere is declaiming for the great unwashed when two process-servers join him onstage to demand he pay his debts. Through prancing and mimicry, Moliere exploits the serious duo with pre-Chaplinesque shtick prior to his imprisonment.
He's bailed out by a sort of talent scout who takes him to meet ridiculously wealthy Jourdain (Fabrice Luchini, perfectly cast), who has covered the younger man's debts. In exchange, he expects Moliere to coach him. Jourdain's goal is to credibly perform a self-penned one-act play destined to impress the enticing Celimene (Ludivine Sagnier), a widowed marquise with whom he is deeply, improbably smitten.
Jourdain is married to Italian beauty Elmire (Laura Morante), by whom he has two daughters. Henriette (Fanny Valette), secretly in love with a commoner, is the older.
Moliere poses as a priest -- Monsieur Tartuffe -- to deflect suspicion while he's in residence honing Jourdain's nonexistent acting skills. And Jourdain gullibly believes the canny, well-connected Dorante (Edouard Baer) is paving the way for Celimene to acknowledge her secret admirer's affections.
Witty, suspenseful script shows that clothing and plumbing have evolved over the past 400 years, but foibles and longing are consistent factors in human affairs. Script makes fine use of formal language as a seductive tool, with humiliation and elation ebbing and flowing on the turn of a phrase.
As Moliere, Duris goes through his complicated paces with resourceful ease, while Luchini is ideal as the lovestruck Jourdain and Baer is enormous fun as self-serving villain Dorante. But it's Morante who, through her deft work here and her exemplary turns in "Private Fears in Public Places" and "Avenue Montaigne," proves she's one of the most spot-on performers in French fare today.
Moliere buffs will delight in locating bits and pieces of his plays in this imaginary venture. But no prior knowledge of the man or his writing is required to enjoy the yarn, which was inspired by the fact that the cash-strapped playwright vanished for a spell when he was 22.
Production design is splendid, widescreen lensing fine.

Like many geniuses of comedy, Frances's pre-eminent 17th-century playwright always felt like a tragedian manqué, a vanity that, had he pursued it, would have left the world bereft of some of theater's greatest pomposity-busting satire. Historians have never solved the mystery of Moliére's temporary disappearance early on in his career, but director Laurent Tirard  fills the gap with an imagined sojourn of the cash-strapped fledgling artist (an awkward Romain Duris ) on the estate of a dilettante dope of a blueblood (the incomparable Fabrice Luchini ), whose attempts to rope "Monsieur Tartuffe" into impressing a tart-tongued courtesan (Ludivine Sagnier ) lay the groundwork for Moliére's most famous farce. Tirard unwinds the action slow and steady, which makes for a slackly paced first hour that all but destroys the movie. Hang in and you'll see the method in this seemingly perverse strategy, as the young blade grows a passion for the highly strung, cultivated lady of the house, beautifully played by Europe's reigning queen of barely suppressed hysteria, Laura Morante . In the end, Moliére  is as much about the making of a patroness as it is about the gestation of artistic form, for it's she who eggs on the callow playwright to reinvent comedy as serious business with a powerful moral core.
