 Cluttered with beautiful junk and crammed to the rafters with feeling, “Momma’s Man” is a touchingly true film, part weepie, part comedy, about the agonies of navigating that slippery slope called adulthood. It was written and directed by Azazel Jacobs, a native New Yorker who has set his modestly scaled movie with a heart the size of the Ritz in the same downtown warren where he was raised. Being a child of the avant-garde as well as an A student, he cast his parents, the filmmaker Ken Jacobs and the artist Flo Jacobs, as the puzzled progenitors of his centerpiece, a wayward son of bohemia, Mikey (Matt Boren).  In American movies, growing up tends to be a job for either Aryan Youth types or the oddballs and outsiders who, long a staple of both sitcoms and the Sundance Film Festival, have migrated to big Hollywood in droves. But growing up Apatow style just means learning to divide your attention between your joystick and the little lady who loves you just the way you are, flab and all. Real life is harder, as is real art. The younger Mr. Jacobs, who has spent the last decade or so learning how to make better and better films, with a handful of shorts and two worthy features, takes a generally unsentimental view of his blobby big baby. Mikey may get down on all fours and crawl on the floor, but the filmmaker never pampers him.  Episodically structured, “Momma’s Man” catches the rhythm of life through drifty interludes, fragmented exchanges and moments so delicate they would break in rougher hands. Shortly after the opening credits, Mikey, who had been visiting his parents during a winter trip, decides not to return to his wife and infant in Los Angeles. Instead he returns to the parental loft and, mumbling something about the flight, crawls into his old lair. There, in a corner aerie overlooking Chambers Street, he sinks into childhood: he rummages through grubby trinkets and treasures, ties a tiny superhero cape around his neck (almost as if he hoped its lightning bolt could give him a jolt) and buries his nose in comic books.  You don’t need a couch and a degree nailed to the wall to figure out that Mikey is suffering from a sudden case of regression. Though that much is obvious the moment he returns to the loft, creeping under its blanketing shadows, not much else about him is. With his sad moon face and small Buddha belly, he looks like a middle manager who got off at the wrong subway stop and somehow wandered into the 1960s. He’s a straight arrow in a quiver full of zigzags and so seemingly out of place that it’s both a wonder he ever fit in the loft and no surprise when he starts stripping off his clothes. Eventually he’s stumbling about in long underwear, like an overgrown toddler.  With its few locations, small cast and limited budget, “Momma’s Man” looks deceptively humble. But Mr. Jacobs has succeeded at  one of the most difficult tasks given a director, which is to make a character come alive through the filmmaking, not exposition. Mikey dissembles freely, though he never explains what he’s going through as he dodges in and out of the loft, evading his wife’s calls and his father’s searching eyes. Mr. Jacobs gives his actors words they can use, not dialogue to chew, as in the hilarious-horrible scene in which Mikey hides inside the bathroom while his mother tries to ease his pain with a maddening litany of maternal comforts —  cereal, tea, coffee —  yet somehow forgetting the breast milk.  As Mikey roams around the loft, nibbling at food, scratching his rear, telling another lie to his wife, he goes deeper, as does the film. He’s at ease in this space, part tomb, part womb, and almost swallowed up by it. There are times when he seems lost amid its disorder, adrift in a secondhand shop crowded with bric-a-brac, toys, paintings and an upright piano, film reels, cans and projectors. (Is he collecting or a collectible?) In one startling scene, Mr. Jacobs casually (carefully) positions him next to the head of a doll resting on a shelf, a juxtaposition that makes the character look as if he were inside a Joseph Cornell box, another precious relic in a fetishistic assemblage.  There’s something haunting about this moment, partly because Mikey seems so colorless alongside all this glorious stuff. “Momma’s Man” is an extraordinarily tender film — Mr. Jacobs and his camera dote on his parents — but it’s more complex than the valentine to Mom and Dad I originally had it pegged as when I first saw it at Sundance. From some angles the loft comes across like a phantasmagoric playground, but it doesn’t appear to offer a lot of room to stretch, much less to grow. Yet,  as the repeated two-shots  of his parents imply, Mr. Jacobs is also acknowledging a simple truth about parents and children too rarely broached in American movies, particularly in an indie scene enslaved by juvenilia: There’s more to your parents than you.  There may be an autobiographical slant to this dynamic, but to harp on the similarities between the man calling the shots behind the camera and the melancholic trying to break free in front of it would miss the point. Like any artist, Mr. Jacobs has shaken down life for what it can give him. That life includes his parents, who belong to a generation of Manhattan artists who have become as exotic as the last of the Mohicans. These are people who helped create not just a child but also a world. In “Momma’s Man,” Mr. Jacobs honors both. “A dewdrop can reflect the universe,” the Soviet filmmaker Alexander Dovzhenko is supposed to have said, which is as perfect a summation of this lovely film as I can imagine.

Thomas Wolfe's immortal words about the impossibility of homecomings loom large over "Momma's Man," writer-director Azazel Jacobs' wryly comic, sometimes heartbreaking and altogether original film about a thirtysomething Angeleno who pays a visit to his aging New York parents and finds himself unwilling or unable to leave. Jacobs' third and most confident feature to date (following "Nobody Needs to Know" and "The Goodtimes Kid"), this minimalist but richly satisfying pic seems assured of fervent critical support and a small but passionate word-of-mouth following on the fest circuit and beyond.
In one of several autobiographical touches, Jacobs casts his own parents -- legendary experimental filmmaker Ken Jacobs and his wife, Flo -- as the parents of his onscreen alter ego, Mikey (played to sad-sack perfection by Matt Boren), and sets the film primarily in the exuberantly cluttered Chambers Street loft where he was reared.
Mikey returns to that loft, claiming to have been bumped from his flight back to Los Angeles -- a plausible enough excuse that buys him 24 more hours back home with mom and dad. But when that day gives way to several, Mikey's excuses start to sound increasingly desperate. Soon, he stops taking phone calls from his understandably panicked wife (Dana Varon) in L.A.
Back in his childhood bedroom -- an upper corner of the loft -- Mikey surrounds himself with old toys, comics, scrapbooks and other Proustian triggers of stored-up memories. He sets about reconnecting with a neighborhood friend (Piero Arcilesi) recently released from jail, and a high-school girlfriend (Eleanor Hutching) to whom he feels he owes an apology. Until, that is, like one of the eternal dinner guests of Bunuel's "Exterminating Angel" (a film Jacobs has cited as an influence), Mikey finds himself physically incapable of crossing the threshold of the loft's front door.
Just what (beyond the general panic of a generation that knows it won't be better off than its parents) has prompted Mikey's existential crisis is never directly addressed, though Mikey is himself the father of a newborn baby. The parental anxiety, though, cuts both ways, as mom and dad ponder what they can do -- short of changing the locks -- to help get Mikey out of his depressive funk.
It's a premise that, in other hands, might have made for an over-the-top Adam Sandler farce. Jacobs, however, pulls off the trickier feat of balancing the scenario's melancholy emotional realities with unexpected moments of Chaplinesque slapstick (as in Mikey's increasingly violent efforts to combat his agoraphobia).
Above all, "Momma's Man" feels like an intensely personal consideration of the impermanence of things -- not just childhood, but also neighborhoods, cities, entire ways of life.
Lyrically shot in grainy 35mm by cinematographer Tobias Datum, the movie captures in vivid detail one of the last stretches of ungentrified New York and the lives of the artists and intellectuals who dwell there. It also celebrates the seminal avant-garde art-making of the elder Jacobs, through brief, elegantly inserted excerpts from his famed "nervous magic lantern" light-projection shows and from his 2004 magnum opus "Star Spangled to Death."
Camera (color), Tobias Datum; editor, Darrin Navarro; music, Mandy Hoffman. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (Spectrum), Jan. 23, 2008. (Also in Rotterdam Film Festival.) Running time: 99 MIN.
 


Thirtyish guy—bit of a schlub but married, with a newborn baby—comes back from California to visit aging parents in New York and, overtaken by a mysterious lethargy, moves into his tiny childhood room. Momma's Man , directed by Azazel Jacobs  from his own screenplay, is one of the sweetest, saddest stories Franz Kafka  never wrote.
That Mikey (Matt Boren ) grew up in a pre-gentrification, tin-ceilinged, wooden-floored lower-Manhattan loft with parents who were unreconstructed Jewish bohemians gives Momma's Man  more than a dollop of local color; that Mikey's parents are played by the filmmaker's own, the artists Ken and Flo Jacobs , and the loft is the place where he actually grew up provides Momma's Man  with considerable emotional resonance. At least for me.
Full disclosure: Although my most vivid memories of Aza Jacobs  are as the unnamed infant installed in a crib in a Johnson City  apartment and called, for what seemed like a very long time, "Mr. Baby," I've known his parents for nearly 40 years, going back to my undergraduate days at the State University of Binghamton , where Ken Jacobs  impressed me as possibly the most brilliant film teacher in the world.
I'm also familiar with the Momma's Man  milieu, specifically the Jacobs' loft—a fantastic assemblage of suspended bicycles, hanging chairs, film cans, wind-up toys, and philosophical machines, that—part studio, part archive—has struck more than one viewer as a character in the movie. And so, while I cannot evaluate Momma's Man  with an outsider's clarity, I can vouch for the authenticity of its location (fascinatingly defamiliarized), as well as the uncanny naturalism (and fond exaggeration) with which Ken and Flo are written: Dad savoring a strange piece of music and propped up in bed, relaxing with a book called American Fascists ; Mom questioning Dad's characterization of his work as "painting" and offering Mikey a "little bit of brownie."
Aza Jacobs isn't the first filmmaker to direct his parents. John Huston 's father Walter had a major role in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre  ; Zoe Cassavetes  and her brother Nick have each directed their mother, Gena Rowlands ; Martin Scorsese  made a documentary about his parents and regularly gave them cameos. Plenty of people base films on family history but, so far as I know, Momma's Man  is alone in approaching psychodrama by having the parents play themselves. And while many avant-garde filmmakers have made movies about their children, the younger Jacobs is the first of these kids to turn the camera on Dad in a feature-length narrative.
Momma's Man  is highly specific, evoking not only the filmmaker's lost childhood but also the heroic New York art scene that had already begun to fade when the now 35-year-old Azazel Jacobs was a boy. But it is even more powerfully universal. Much comic pathos arises from the realization that Mikey has no perspective on his parents. They are as mysterious in their idiosyncrasies as anyone's. (And with his doughy physique and placid moon face, Boren gives the impression of an eternal child, if not one produced by this particular Mom and Dad.) Mikey's prolonged visit is not so much a regression as a blissful immersion in some pre-analytical Eden. Cluttered with charged objects, the magic loft is in itself an image of childhood. Mikey raptly rummages through his stuff, finding a costume cape, some angst-ridden teenage letters, and an old guitar. Quietly, he sings one of his high-school songs: "Fuck, fuck, fuck you—hope you die, too."
From the movie's first shot—a tight close-up of Mikey and Mom's interlocked hands—Momma's Man  radiates unconditional affection. Unlike the Albert Brooks  character in Brooks's not dissimilar Mother , Mikey doesn't have to struggle for parental love. On the contrary, he's helpless in the face of their concern. More touching than Mikey's attachment to his parents is the degree to which they bask in his pudgy presence and, against all reason, yearn for him to stay in their world. The key image has all three lying in bed raptly watching an old movie on TV. (In a sinister joke, it seems to be Chaplin's comedy of murder, Monsieur Verdoux .)
Bumped from his return flight, Mikey is initially confounded by airline bureaucracy. Soon, however, he is inventing reasons to stay in this nutty paradise. He ignores the increasingly desperate messages left by his abandoned wife (Dana Varon ), preferring to sit in wintry Hudson River Park  or lie on his narrow little bed in his semi-private corner of the loft, reading comic books, warding off dread, and letting his beard grow. Dad tries to amuse him by playing an old 78 ("Crazy Blues") or demonstrating a new crawling toy purchased in Chinatown. Few things in the movie are funnier than Dad's expectant smile and Mikey's blank-faced appreciation; nothing is more poignant than Mom's heartfelt assurance: "You can stay here as long as you want."
A bid for Kafkaesque happiness? Underscored by Mandy Hoffman 's pensive, dryly whimsical piano compositions, Mikey's breakdown has the quality of a wistful nightmare. Space is elusive. The loft seems at once vast and claustrophobic and, although the viewer is treated to many slow pans, its geography is never clear. Mikey is forever spotting portents in the clutter or receiving mysterious bulletins (from the TV, the cell phone, and his own unconscious). In one unsuccessful attempt to leave the loft, he waits until his parents are asleep; perhaps they'll think they only imagined his visit.
