 Oh, not to be 13 again! Michael Kang's small, perfectly observed portrait of Ernest Chin (Jeffrey Chyau), a Chinese-American boy who lives and works in a dingy downscale motel operated by his mother, captures the glum desperation of inhabiting the biological limbo of early adolescence. For anyone stranded there for even a month, that limbo can feel like an eternity.  Ernest, a chubby, egg-roll-noshing youth, could stand for every geeky pubescent outsider who ever yearned for some privacy and sophistication while squirming under the puritanical thumb of a stern, watchful parent. His unsmiling mother, Ahma (Jade Wu), who runs a motor inn largely patronized by couples who pay by the hour, is a grim taskmistress who expects her son to keep the place spotless and to mop up the messes left over from the quickies he hears through the walls.  With a running time of only 76 minutes, "The Motel" knows its modest place in the cinematic scheme of things. The drama, such as it is, stems not from any conventional plot, but in the accruing of small, telling details that sustain a feeling of lives in suspension. One held glance between the mother and the son can communicate more information than any number of speeches, for underneath their resentment lies a reservoir of mutual understanding and love that's too volatile to put into words.  Ahma, abandoned by her husband, is the head of a household that also includes Ernest's bratty younger sister, Katie (Alexis Kapp Chang), and his enfeebled grandfather, Gung Gung (Stephen Chen). He is regularly harassed by Roy (Conor J. White), a bully roughly his own age, who lives with his troubled family in the establishment and pelts Ernest with racial epithets. Ernest has a serious crush on Christine (Samantha Futerman), a slightly older girl who works as a waitress in her parents' nearby Chinese restaurant. She treats him kindly but has no romantic interest.  The latest bone of contention between Ernest and his mother involves a writing contest he has entered. When he receives the news that he has won honorable mention, she reprimands him for not telling her he had entered. Instead of being proud and supportive, she sneers at him for not coming in first. To this bitter, suspicious woman, writing is suspect because it's tantamount to telling lies.  An ambiguous older-brother figure appears in the person of Sam Kim (Sung Kang), a cocky, heavy-drinking Korean rake, down on his luck, who lurches into the movie with a prostitute on his arm and becomes a temporary resident of the motel. Befriending Ernest, Sam gives the boy driving lessons and offers ridiculous advice on seducing women. Desperate for a male role model and emboldened by Sam, Ernest begins mounting small acts of defiance against his mother.  In his brashest move, he steals her car, takes Christine for a drive, makes a comical pass and, when she resists him, tosses the keys into the woods. This incident could have amplified into full-scale melodrama, replete with tears and recriminations. Instead it is treated as another small step in Ernest's inevitable self-assertion.  "The Motel," adapted from Ed Lin's novel "Waylaid," refuses to designate heroes and villains. Everyone, even the pathetic bully, against whom Ernest eventually lashes out viciously, is viewed with a measure of compassion. Ernest may not realize it, but this stagnant period of feeling betwixt and between will soon come to end.
Hardly a native flowering of extra-mainstream vision these days, American indies are trapped in a ghetto of second-class homogenization, less pandering than Hollywood  but just as conservative. The little-people semi-stories, colorless dialogue, stiff-legged acting, sniffly amused middle-class soundtracks, deficit of visual intelligence: It's a cinema its own lower-middle-class characters would find dull and patronizing, not due to narrative asceticism but for the lack of ambition or imagination. The Motel , Michael Kang 's modest Sundance applause reaper, doesn't deserve to be shotgunned for the sins of 30 other movies. But the underwhelming syncopation of make-nice clichés is too familiar. Based on a novel by Ed Lin , Kang's film is a pubertal dramedy centered on Ernest (Jeffrey Chyau ), a Chinese American 13-year-old junk-foodie who works as a maid at his mother's backwater motel. There he impassively finds discarded porn, hangs with a 16-year-old waitress (Samantha Futerman ), puts up with bullies, argues with his regally ferocious mother (Jade Wu ) about a writing contest he entered, and learns about irresponsible loitering from a lonely Korean American whoremonger (Sung Kang ) who leaves only to pick up booty and booze.
Kang shot his film in Poughkeepsie , but the locale has been anonymized, and the blind tumble into banality is easy and inevitable. ("I hate you!" Ernest eventually hollers at his hard-case mom; "You need me!" Ernest is told by his new hooker-loving pal; "I don't need anyone!" is the reply.) If The Motel  circles around to a single effective moment of generational confrontation amid the sulking, credit should perhaps go to Wu, expertly limning out the script's most interesting character by far, a fearless immigrant woman we first see busting down a goldbricker's door with a baseball bat. She radiates experience, which is more than can be said about the filmmakers. Michael Atkinson
