Partly a family memoir, partly a historical essay and partly the record of an improbable feat of engineering, Godfrey Cheshire’s documentary “Moving Midway: A Southern Plantation in Transit” tells a fascinating and complicated story of regional identity. Mr. Cheshire, a longtime film critic (and as such an acquaintance of mine), connects his longstanding interest in American popular culture with the lore attached to his ancestral home, a North Carolina plantation called Midway. Midway, built in 1848 near Raleigh, belongs to the Hintons, ancestors of the Silvers, the family of Mr. Cheshire’s mother, Elizabeth, who appears in his film to offer tart opinions of her ancestors, Yankees and a good deal more. Elizabeth and other members of the family are concerned about the development that is rapidly changing the Southern landscape and encroaching on the gracious old mansion that is so central to who they are. As the strip malls and highways draw nearer, Mr. Cheshire’s cousin Charlie decides to move the house, a project that occupies the middle portion of the movie and turns it momentarily from an ambling first-person rumination into something like Werner Herzog’s “Fitzcarraldo.” Not that madness is what motivates Charlie to hoist an old wooden building onto steel beams and truck it across the backcountry. Like many white Southerners, the current generation of Hintons has a nostalgic, sentimental relationship to the past, and a wary, ambivalent attitude toward modernity. At the heart of “Moving Midway” is the desire to preserve that warm, respectful sense of tradition and continuity while at the same time looking clearly at the less noble realities of history and making some attempt to rectify them. “Moving Midway” includes an incisive tour of the “moonlight and magnolias” mythology of the Old South manufactured by Hollywood, which provides a useful context for Mr. Cheshire’s inquiries into the annals of Midway. He shares some fond reminiscences of the place, and an intriguing portrait of his great-great-aunt Mary (or Mimi), a dominant figure in the 20th-century history of Midway and a keen collector of Hinton genealogical information. Some of it, anyway. If the transportation of Midway provides one dramatic crux in Mr. Cheshire’s film, the other arrives with the discovery of an African-American branch of the Hinton family. The two narratives converge at the end, when, in the restored house, far from the rush of traffic and commerce, the descendants of masters and slaves come together for a party. It is a lovely, touching scene, but to his credit Mr. Cheshire does not oversell it as a moment of reconciliation. Having begun with William Faulkner’s famous observation that “the past isn’t dead; it isn’t even past,” he does not rush to forgive his ancestors their transgressions. Nor does he undertake his investigation alone. On his journeys back home, Mr. Cheshire is frequently accompanied by Robert Hinton, a professor of Africana studies at New York University, the film’s chief historian and associate producer as well as a descendant of slaves owned by the director’s family. The two men are not kin, but they do seem to be kindred spirits, thoughtful and courteous and also aware of the ambiguities of their shared project. “Moving Midway” may not advance any grand new thesis about the South and its history, but it turns an old house into a rich and strange repository of local knowledge.

Longtime film critic and first-time filmmaker Godfrey Cheshire revisits his ancestors' plantation in North Carolina to record its wholesale transport in "Moving Midway," a Herculean saga worthy of Werner Herzog's "Fitzcarraldo" (or perhaps Les Blank's "Burden of Dreams"). Operating within a more homegrown cinematic frame of reference, Cheshire explores the Hollywood myth of the plantation via clips, while witnessing its real-life transplant. But "Midway" also develops a contempo context as Cheshire discovers a black branch of the family that increasingly shares the frame. Uniquely Southern docu has become surprisingly timely this election year. 
As Midway Plantation, the family's antebellum home in Raleigh, N.C., is now surrounded by strip malls, housing developments and chain stores, Cheshire's cousin, Charles Hinton Silver, resolves to uproot the house (along with its eight outbuildings) and haul it overland to another plot -- not coincidentally, part of the plantation's original land grant. As family members weigh in on the pros and cons of this ambitious undertaking, their all-white, descendants-of-English-nobility version of family history becomes increasingly at odds with its mixed-race, mixed-religion reality.
Much of the film reps a detailed chronicle of the move itself, an engineering feat of epic proportions, although perhaps not quite as fascinating as its key spot in the film implies. Nevertheless, watching men navigate bridges and swampy ground with their huge load indeed evokes a sense of historical weightiness.
Cheshire places his discovery of Robert Hinton, a professor of African studies at NYU who traces his ancestry back to Hinton plantation slaves, early in the film. Invited to Midway before the move, Hinton freely shares his knowledge and perspective with the family; indeed, he confesses he feels more at home with Southern whites than with Northern blacks. Yet this sense of shared history can be illusory, as pic soon makes clear.
Meanwhile, Al Hinton, a teacher in Brooklyn, and his 95-year-old grandfather, Abraham Lincoln Hinton -- who, unlike Robert, are actually blood relations of the Cheshire clan --enter the film relatively late in the proceedings, as they are graciously welcomed to the celebration of the home's reopening in its new locale.
"Midway" has been compared to Ross McElwee's work, particularly "Bright Leaves." But while McElwee's first-person diary approach depends on a constructed comic voice, the frequently on-camera Cheshire presupposes an "I" of transparent sincerity (and little humor). The innately problematic nature of such an affectless voice is only partly assuaged by Robert Hinton's presence as an alternate narrator of an alternate history.
If "Midway" proposes a South capable of incorporating contradictions, Cheshire is not unaware of more egregious co-options: Shopping centers sustain the Midway Plantation brand, and a housing project is named after the first African slave brought over to till the soil.
Tech credits are creditable.
