y Mother's Smile" was shown as part of the 2002 New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Elvis Mitchell's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4, 2002; the full text is online at nytimes.com/movies. The unrated film is in Italian with English subtitles. "Give me some peace - get out of my head," murmurs Leonardo (Alberto Mondini), the boy gesturing and pacing intently at the very beginning of Marco Bellocchio's latest work, an expansive, often inconsistent yet still memorable film, "My Mother's Smile." The boy, it turns out, is talking to God. "I want him to leave me alone," he tells his mother, Irene (Jacqueline Lustig). But God, or something, has other plans for his family. Leonardo's father, Ernesto (Sergio Castellitto), an artist with tortured eyes,  gets news that would land in anyone's world like a bombshell. Ernesto's dead mother, who manifested miraculous healing powers, is a candidate for canonization. For Ernesto, whose hatred for her is nearly matched by the intensity of his atheism, the shock value is exponentially higher. "She was stupid" is how he sums her up to the priest who has come to give him the news. The far-ranging "Smile"  seeks to say so much that its reach is striking. It has been directed with a masterly, almost perverse bravura that even the Vatican might appreciate, if the Roman Catholic Church hadn't denounced this Italian film. Mr. Bellocchio employs bold, dusky classicism to marry probity and absurdity, making "Smile" occasionally as disconcerting as a knock-knock joke told by Luchino Visconti. The picture floats and plummets like a box kite in a storm, on drafts of melodrama, mysticism and humor. The revelation about his mother is driving Ernesto's family into biblical furies, deepening the rift between Ernesto and his brothers, including one who has been hospitalized after committing a murder. "You won't be some obscure criminal, but a famous penitent," he's told. Irene, from whom Ernesto is separated, sees the canonization as a boon for the boy. "Couldn't it be useful for him to have a saint for a grandmother?" she asks. Cynicism isn't just the province of family. It's suggested that the church has sent a woman (the lustrous Chiara Conti) to entice Ernesto into going along with the program. Mr. Bellocchio wants to use "Smile" to dramatize the familial wars that grow out of intensity of feeling, and how it can drive people apart. Ernesto's atheism is one of the strongest feelings he knows; it's both a commitment to a belief and a way of rejecting his mother. But it's tough for him to puzzle things out when he comes upon a young woman in a blood-stained tunic who's told to  "smile like a saint" for a photo shoot recreating a scene - fictional, of course - from his mother's life. What he calls his mother's "lethal, indifferent smile" gets him into trouble. He flashes it to a crusty, pompous old nobleman who perceives it as an insult and challenges Ernesto to a duel. The mortified double takes that Mr. Castellitto allows to bleed through his mournful basset-hound face do a lot of the director's work for him. Pasquale Mari's cinematography and Riccardo Giagni's complex score are so ripe they border on parody, but scale has to be what Mr. Bellocchio was after. Though the narrative is spotty, and occasionally confounding, there is an epic warmth in the way it's rendered.  
Calling all Derridettes: The headiest movie in the annual "Film Comment Selects" is surely The Ister , a three-hour Australian cine-essay inspired by Martin Heidegger 's 1942 lecture course on the 19th-century German poet Friedrich Hölderlin 's Danubian ode.
David Barison  and Daniel Ross 's digital-video doc travels upriver past presidential visitations (Romania ), bombed bridges (Serbia ), Stalin-era steelworks (Hungary ), Nazi concentration camps (Mauthausen ), and mock classical temples (Bavaria ) to the heart of darkness, the Black Forest cabin where Heidegger wrote Being and Time . There is evidently a German term for aquatic road movies—wasserstrasse —but The Ister  also offers a stream of consciousness. Three philosophers, including onetime bank robber Bernard Stiegler , and filmmaker Hans-Jürgen Syberberg  provide commentary on Greek myths, European history, and Heidegger's theory of agribusiness.
You may wonder if the humble DV mini-cam is the technology that enframes the river's essence. Indeed, the onrushing landscape, however despoiled, is a Bazinian counterpoint to the babbling brook of Heideggerian seinundzeitis . The movie's single Sunday-afternoon screening will be followed by a panel discussion.
