
Why is a movie with Uma Thurman fighting New York City crime in heels and a beret not bigger fun? Oh, that's right: Because she's crazy
. We can tell because when ``My Super Ex-Girlfriend" runs out of fresh ideas about how to make its heroine look nuts, it has her act like some of the psychos who terrorized Michael Douglas.
That kitchen knife she's holding might as well be the ice pick Sharon Stone wielded to great camp effect in ``Basic Instinct." And when her breakup gets particularly rough, Thurman's cape of blond hair turns inexplicably into Glenn Close's ``Fatal Attraction" frizz. She even goes Close one better. Instead of boiling a bunny, her superhero, G-Girl, just throws a live shark into her ex's apartment.
Luke Wilson plays the ex, Matt Saunders. And he's utterly relatable, going from lust to loathing. He first meets Jenny Johnson (Thurman) on the train. Her purse is nabbed, and rather unheroically, he gets it back. She's charmed and agrees to go out with him. On their date, she's a geeky neurotic, and the movie tries turning that into something most men would find tough to resist coming from Thurman. ``I think I'm good at sex," she says. ``You decide." As it turns out, she's too good: The bed rocks with seismic force. This is the super freak Rick James warned us about.
But things between the two go sour fast. In Matt's words, Jenny is needy, possessive, and jealous. If Matt tells anyone she's G-Girl, she promises she'll do something unprintable to him with a chainsaw. (Why are there no other exes for Matt's commiseration?) She's openly hostile to the co-worker (Anna Faris) he's been in a mutual flirtation with. Eventually, he breaks it off, and she goes bananas.
When Matt agrees to help G-Girl's suave archenemy, Professor Bedlam (Eddie Izzard), steal her powers, the film becomes an all-too-transparent tale of misogyny in the movies. Did I mention there's a supercatfight? And that Wanda Sykes, as Matt's boss, is relentlessly and unfunnily looking to charge him with sexual harassment?
Perhaps I protest too much. ``My Super Ex-Girlfriend" is all in the spirit of a good time. And the veteran comedy producer and director Ivan Reitman even ends his truly-terrible-movie streak. (``Junior." ``Father's Day." ``Evolution." Remember those?) He keeps things light, even though they go on for too long.
But made from a script by Don Payne, an accomplished ``Simpsons" writer, the movie is a dude's one-way fantasy tinged with an element of fear. It's unfortunate that the premise falls so comfortably along trite gender lines: Men are piggish (particularly Rainn Wilson, as Matt's lewd work buddy) and powerful women are strident loons. Even the feminist sculptures of Kiki Smith, which are on display in the art gallery where G-Girl's alter ego works, are mocked.
Much of the gags, though, are aimed at Thurman, who proves a game comedian, mugging and shrieking her way through the part. Admittedly, there is something appealing about the duality of a strong girl with a deep, dark, insecure side, and Thurman brings out the contradictions. But having killed Bill with such ferocity and intense physical wit, it's depressing to watch her cut down for our amusement.

         Watching "My Super Ex-Girlfriend," the new comedy directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Don Payne, I experienced a little pang of nostalgia for Psycho Ex-Girlfriend. Remember? For a week in the spring of 2001, the website created by a newly single Dallas guy to house his world-class collection of crazy voicemail messages from a jilted lover racked up hundreds of thousands of hits a day. Alas, the whole thing to turned out to be a hoax, and all 53 MP3-fulls of alternating vitriol, contempt, unhinged rage and free-form despondency disappeared mysteriously into the ether. Psycho Ex may have been a fake, but as anyone who has ever been on the receiving, administering or witnessing end of a similar situation knows, she felt hilariously, horribly, triumphantly real .
 
  "Ex-Girlfriend" continues in the proud tradition of Psycho Ex, rather fearlessly bumping up its commitment to the concept by making the ex-girlfriend super, as in bullet-proof. Uma Thurman plays Jenny Johnson, a neurotic assistant curator at an art gallery who moonlights as a caped savior-about-town. G-Girl, as she's known, has meteor-given powers that she uses for good — only tetchily, and with kind of a bad attitude. Then again, you would be grumpy too if your freelance job kept cutting in on your dates and quiet evenings at home.
 


         






    As G-Girl flies around saving the day to cheesy rousing music, you can't help but entertain the vain hope that a few more spoofs like this one will help put the exhausted, cranky superhero genre to bed already. So, one suspects, do the makers of "Ex-Girlfriend," as the real hero of the movie is not the rich, caped crusader with the split personality, but Matt Saunders, a chumpy, lovable psycho-magnet charismatically played by Luke Wilson. Matt has been nursing a long, moony crush on his cute assistant Hannah (Anna Faris). She, naturally, is going out with a male model, and likes Matt as a friend. Matt hasn't yet admitted his feelings for Hannah even to himself when he approaches Jenny on a dare from his piggish friend Vaughn (Rainn Wilson) on the subway one evening after work. Jenny shoos him, but when her purse is snatched and Matt saves the day (or tries to), she changes her mind. (As she tells him later, "You know, Matt, I have to help people every day, but nobody's ever helped me before you.")
 
  Matt has reservations about the clingy, needy, defensive, jealous and turbo-intimate Jenny from their first, weird dinner together. ("I think I'm good at sex," she yammers nervously. "I don't know. You decide.") But he tries to make it work even after he discovers that she is being stalked by an arch-nemesis, professional super-villain Professor Bedlam (Eddie Izzard), who appears to be strangely fixated on her. Jenny, meanwhile, is uncomfortably fixated on him. 
As Matt becomes aware of his feelings for Hannah and gets his chance to act on them, his real troubles begin.
 
  For a movie about an unstable superhero who dresses like Carrie Bradshaw after a gamma zap, "Ex-Girlfriend" is cleverly attuned to the real-life nadirs of big-city psychosexual dynamics. Thurman plugs thrillingly into her inner Alanis Morissette to bring to life a jilted super-heroine who mounts a massive vengeance campaign against the hapless guy who didn't like her back. It's no wonder that, unshackled from the snoozy trifecta of acceptable female characterizations (the picture of noble perfection, the blow-up doll, the victim), Thurman goes hog-wild. Super-womanhood is so taxing and tiresome, you forgive her for needing to blow off some steam. But despite G-Girl's inability to get dumped with dignity and her generalized threat to pets, she's no bunny boiler, sentenced to die by wifely hands. The movie doesn't purport to have her stand for all women, just the crazy ones, and as such, G-Girl is pure, soul-cleansing id catharsis. Charming as he is, it's hard not to thrill at the sight of G-Girl tossing a shark through Matt's window. Because, seriously, who hasn't wanted to do that?

 
 
'My Super Ex-Girlfriend'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for sexual content, crude humor, language and brief nudity
 
 A Twentieth Century Fox release. Director Ivan Reitman. Screenplay by Don Payne. Producers Gavin Polone, Arnon Milchan. Director of photography Don Burgess. Editor Sheldon Kahn.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 35 minutes.
 
 In general release.   

 The shaky comedy “My Super Ex-Girlfriend” must have been a dream to pitch: “Fatal Attraction” meets “Wonder Woman,” but funny. The casting seems as if it should have been equally breezy, with Uma Thurman doing double duty as a New York neurotic, Jenny Johnson, and a secret superhero, G-Girl, who flies through the air putting out fires, though only when her drab brown hair turns a costly shade of Hamptons blond.  Toss in Luke Wilson as the nice guy who says and does all the right things and Rainn Wilson as the second banana who says and does all the wrong ones. Stir, or, in the case of the director Ivan Reitman, of “Ghostbusters” fame, hope for the best.  Why G-Girl and not G-Woman? For the same reason that this particular superhero can access her powers only after she slips on something tighter and a whole lot less comfortable-looking: she’s a joke. Whether you laugh at this joke will depend on whether you think the film says more about men than women (which it does), and whether you find its characterization of the spurned she-devil a sexist cliché (which it is) or an amusing sexist cliché (which it also is, reservedly).  How hard and often you laugh will probably hinge on a host of other variables, like your appreciation for a cast that includes Eddie Izzard as the villainous Professor Bedlam, as well as your tolerance for junky-looking cinematography and Mr. Reitman’s cheerfully slapdash direction.  A pasty Luke Wilson  plays Matt Saunders, a single guy who has one of those dream jobs and Manhattan pads that seem to exist only in the minds of Hollywood filmmakers. One day on the subway Matt, spurred on by his pal Vaughn (Rainn Wilson), strikes up a conversation with a woman busily paying no mind to anyone else. Before long, he and the stranger he first knows as an art dealer, then as a crusader, are tussling in one of the kinkier sex scenes to earn a PG-13 rating, as in: “parents strongly cautioned” that Jenny makes like a battering ram, executing night moves that crack the wall, break the bed and leave her dazed partner rather unbelievably intact. And, yes, there are jokes about that superhero name.  Matt’s postcoital smile and a wobbly walk that brings to mind Jake Gyllenhaal’s first morning-after in “Brokeback Mountain” suggest that, however physically demanding, Jenny is a keeper. Alas, as if by clockwork or the professional lout’s handbook, she turns out to be wildly insecure, possessive, needy, the whole crazy-woman nine yards, which means that, at least as far as the filmmakers are concerned, she’s both a drag and a threat.  It also means that before too long she’s history, soon replaced in Matt’s affections by the nice, naturally blond Hannah (Anna Faris). Those who rooted for Glenn Close, even while admitting that the boiled bunny was a wee bit excessive, may enjoy the sight of G-Girl punching a skylight into her ex’s ceiling.  The screenwriter Don Payne, a writer on “The Simpsons” here earning his first big-screen credit, may not have had Ms. Close, much less the Sonic Youth frontwoman Kim Gordon, in mind when he wrote this film. But he might as well have since, unwittingly or not, it perfectly expresses what Ms. Gordon once called the “fear of a female planet.” In “My Super Ex-Girlfriend,” G-Girl rockets around saving the day in skirts and high heels like some nitro-fueled Carrie Bradshaw, outshining her dweeb of a boyfriend at every turn. So of course he dumps her. Who cares?  Good riddance to bad-boyfriend rubbish. This super chick may be super nuts, but when trouble comes calling, as it tends to do in the big city, who you gonna call? Wall-buster!  “My Super Ex-Girlfriend” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has mild violence and ouch-worthy sex.

The fusion of effects-fueled action fantasy with comedy worked well for director Ivan Reitman 22 years ago in "Ghostbusters" and, less so, five years ago in "Evolution." But, it fails to save his latest, "My Super Ex-Girlfriend." Uma Thurman, a female superhero with emotional problems and dating issues, doesn't so much fight the forces of evil as battle the wit-starved movie's torpor -- indeed, her perf suggests what the entire film might have been. Late July launch helpfully separates pic from the "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest's" B.O. pillage, but auds aren't likely to go for a long-term summer commitment.
Since it upends the love interest angle in every recent superhero pic from "Spider-Man" to "Superman Returns," the central notion in Don Payne's screenplay would seem irresistibly surefire (if more than a tad sexist): What if a woman with superpowers was not only able to stop crime and save the planet, but was also neurotic, possessive and insanely jealous?
The answer on screen is strangely uninspired, especially given both Reitman's proven proclivities for jostling effects and laughs and Payne's track record as a vet writer for "The Simpsons."
First seen as a supersonic blur cutting across the Manhattan skyline, G-Girl (Thurman) hoists a getaway car driven by jewel thieves and dumps it in front of an NYPD precinct, while also making a definitive fashion statement in her black-leather getup, boots and long blonde mane.
But G-Girl has another, mousier, Clark-Kentish side as Jenny Johnson, who somehow attracts unlucky-in-love architect Matt (Luke Wilson).
Thurman doesn't merely adopt glasses as a disguise, but an entire persona that hints at a librarian-type who's stayed deep in the bookstalls far too long. Just under the surface is a sexually starved gal looking for love and more than a bit fatigued at having to be on call for all the latest New York crises.
Jenny runs a happening art gallery and lives in a cool apartment, though this lifestyle doesn't seem to match her personality.
Matt is pure vanilla, a blankly nice guy who's given nothing but bad advice by woefully unfunny best buddy Vaughn (Rainn Wilson) and slow to pick up on the signals sent by co-worker Hannah (Anna Faris).
Just as Matt senses that something's wrong with Jenny, he's abducted by Professor Bedlam (an oddly cast Eddie Izzard), who demands details of Jenny's private life. In a brief sequence that's typical of the movie's half-developed action pieces, Bedlam hangs the uncooperative Matt upside down by a rope off the Statue of Liberty and is saved at the last moment by G-Girl.
Jenny now decides to reveal her secret to Matt, and the sparkle in Matt's eyes at the prospect of shtupping a superhero is one of the only moments where the chemistry between him and Jenny rises above the simmer level. Simply spotting Hannah in Matt's arms unleashes Jenny/G-Girl's jealous wrath, and the rest of the movie is consumed with this super ex-g.f. trashing Matt's life, from zapping his goldfish with laser beams to tossing sharks into his bedroom.
Scenes that are neither amusing nor rousing clog the movie, though Reitman finds brief respite with a lovely flashback illustrating how Jenny gained her powers.
All else pales next to Thurman's daring characterization and her unnerving flair for letting a storm of warring emotions play out on her face. Luke Wilson sticks to his most reliable mode, reacting wide-eyed to everything around him and trying to stay normal, although he skirts with being plain dull.
Faris leaves only a faint impression, while Rainn Wilson grows more annoying by the minute. Brilliant comic originals like Izzard and Wanda Sykes may simply be too original to jibe with such uninspired material.
Sleek production elements, from lensing to design, lack any real verve to lend pic a distinct look or style. Teddy Castellucci's overdone score tries to make up for the movie's general lack of oomph.
