
''My Summer of Love" works extremely hard to appear messy and artless; it wants to be a ripe-to-bursting fruit that falls off the tree at your feet. The approach yields dividends: a film about adolescent passion, ''Summer" has been shot with a feverish, hazy intensity that mirrors its heroines' emotional state. This is what life looks like from too close up.
Despite that achievement, Pawel Pawlikowski's film remains a conceit on a number of levels. Here's a story about two girls who fall in love: It could be about sexual pleasure or power games or social class or religious mania. It could be entirely hedonistic or carry a hidden moral sting. It could even work as a subtle parody of overwrought girls on the cusp of womanhood. Working from Helen Cross's 2001 novel, Pawlikowski and his actors give us a little of everything and therefore something perilously close to nothing.
Still, ''Summer" has received rapturous reviews in some quarters, mostly from men, and a cynic might be tempted to file even the most intellectual raves next to a recent Internet post that read, ''Dude, it has lesbians, and not half-bad looking ones. What's not to like?" There's something to be said for honesty.
Pawlikowski sets his tale in Yorkshire, in aimless midsummer; the heat waves rising off the fields are almost as thick as the accents. Mona (Nathalie Press) is a rawboned, freckle-faced local with a grudge against the world; she could pass for actress Tilda Swinton's loose country cousin. Lying amid the clover one afternoon, she looks up to see an imperious young woman named Tamsin (Emily Blunt) on horseback. Cut to a close-up of the horse's trembling eye. Introductions are made; ''Funny," says Tamsin, ''you don't look like a Mona." Cue muffled snickers from some quarters of the audience and outraged shushing from others.
There are further hints that we're not to take ''My Summer of Love" as soberly as one might think. Tamsin, a private school girl who lives in the village's mansion on the hill, takes it upon herself to inculcate the working-class Mona in the ways of Nietzsche and Edith Piaf, and her dormitory pompousness can be a hoot. Blunt gives a fine performance that shows us the self-dramatizing dowager looming in Tamsin's future; for now, the character is sexy, pathetic, and obnoxious all at once.
Mona becomes putty in Tamsin's hands; the loss of willpower is what turns her on. Her mother's dead, her father's long gone, and her brother Phil (Paddy Considine) is an ex-con reprobate who has found Jesus and is building a giant cross to erect on a nearby mount. Why, I'm not sure, since he already has a cross to bear in Mona, who mourns the loss of her sibling and does all she can to make his strange and humorless replacement miserable.
But Mona and Tamsin have it in for the world, which is indisputably male, and they create a simmering, rebellious alternate universe of their own. The slow amble up to their mutual seduction has moments of real erotic power -- and just as many moments of dippy, sub-D.H. Lawrence symbolism that wouldn't feel out of place on Cinemax after midnight. The languorous waterfall where they swim and first kiss; the apple Tamsin chews as she contemplates tempting Phil -- is Pawlikowski kidding with this stuff? And if he is, to what purpose?
For my money, the film's star is cinematographer Ryszard Lenczewski, who also shot the director's 2000 breakthrough ''Last Resort." There he imbued a depressed resort town in the north of England with unexpected magic; here, it's as though he has reinvented how to see the world. He injects an impatient, hormonal heat into the camera angles and woozy colors -- the cinematographic equivalent of an adolescent's diary.
Some of the narrative twists may shock you, or you may see them coming a mile down the lane; in any event, ''My Summer of Love" remains stubbornly stalled between ''artistic" lesbian hubba-hubba and such tougher fare as Peter Jackson's superior ''Heavenly Creatures," which went much further into the gray area of adolescent passions and power games. At its most interesting, the movie offers us the sight of people desperately embracing faith in the hopes it will pull them through. Phil believes in Jesus (he says); Mona believes in Tamsin (she says); Tamsin believes in nothing (she says).
What does Pawel Pawlikowski believe in? And why is he so reluctant to tell us?


         Two teen girls forge an explosive connection in a compelling Pawel Pawlikowski film.What is it about the mercurial emotional voltage of teenage girls that contains the potential for obsessive relationships? The deep need for closeness, the manic appetite for shared experience, for someone who cares or even simply notices, can result in the creation of private worlds that threaten to either explode or implode on very short notice.
 
  Hollywood may pander to the teenage market, but it assiduously avoids troubling, compelling stories like these, stories about young people that adults would appreciate. Peter Jackson explored one in his incendiary 1994 "Heavenly Creatures," and now Polish-born British director Pawel Pawlikowski gives us another in the exceptional "My Summer of Love," a film as different from its Sandra Dee teensploitation title as its two protagonists are from each other.
 


         






    Pawlikowski is an assured, intuitive writer-director who uses a system of controlled improvisation to examine out-of-control people that's reminiscent of Mike Leigh's celebrated technique. Starting from a novel by Helen Cross and a 37-page "shooting document" (as opposed to the standard 120-page script) and with two gifted, adventurous actresses, he has achieved wonders.
 
  As his previous feature, 2001's memorable "Last Resort," demonstrated, Pawlikowski is a second-skin filmmaker, someone whose sensitivity to people enables him to truly get inside his characters' private worlds, to know them better than they sometimes know themselves.
 
  When we first see Mona (Natalie Press), she's doggedly pushing a motor-less motorbike through the dreamy Yorkshire countryside. Her accent, once we hear it, pigeonholes her as working class, but she has a sharp, feral intelligence and a sense that there is more to be had from life than her usual diversion of furtive sex in cars with married men.
 
  Suddenly, like an apparition in a dream, the inescapably posh Tamsin (Emily Blunt) appears riding a white horse. She's a bit older, a lot more assured and sophisticated, and she's been suspended from her boarding school for being a bad influence. She lives in a large manor and casually invites Mona to "drop by if you're bored."
 
  Mona is always bored, but especially so now that her ex-con older brother Phil ("Last Resort" and "Cinderella Man's" Paddy Considine) has become born-again. He decides to turn his pub the Swan, where he lives upstairs with Mona, into a spiritual center to help bring the entire neighborhood to Jesus.
 
  Tamsin and Mona are superficially different enough to be initially wary of each other but soon realize that, with their wicked senses of humor, their baby-faced nihilism and contempt for whatever anyone else takes seriously, they are made for each other.
 
  More than that, they need each other in very real ways. Tamsin is a dreamer and fantasist, Mona a driven doer, and while the former is in need of an accomplice, the later is looking for an instigator to point her in satisfying directions. And, both having been let down by people they counted on, they share a yearning for the fantasy of all-consuming hothouse romance.
 
  In fact, Mona and Tamsin turn out to be an incendiary combination, frustrated young women whose heedless lack of boundaries and willingness to try anything make them more dangerous together than they were apart. As their relationship deepens, as their notions of fantasy and reality get jumbled up, it's an open question who is in more danger of getting singed by this symbiotic bond.
 
  Pawlikowski, who wrote the script in collaboration with playwright Michael Wynne, has the knack of getting his people to act dramatically, unexpectedly and always believably. He's created a most provocative love story, about two people who will never forget each other, but not for anything like the reasons they initially imagine.
 
 'My Summer of Love'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for sexuality, language and some drug use.
 
 Times guidelines:
 Some nudity and sexual activity.
 
 A Focus Features release. Director Pawel Pawlikowski. Producers Tanya Seghatchian, Christopher Collins. Executive producers David M. Thompson, Chris Auty, Emma Hayter. Screenplay by Pawel Pawlikowski, in collaboration with Michael Wynne, based on the novel by Helen Cross. Director of photography Ryszard Lenczewski. Editor David Charap. Costume designer Julian Day. Music Alison Goldfrapp, Will Gregory. Production designer John Stevenson. Running time: 1 hour, 26 minutes. At Laemmle's Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., West Hollywood, (323) 848-3500; Landmark's NuWilshire, 1314 Wilshire Blvd., Santa Monica, (310) 281-8223; and Edwards South Coast Village 3, 1561 W. Sunflower Ave., Santa Ana, (714) 540-1970.   

Pop culture is now so drenched in glib ''dark'' thrills that it's rare, and purifying, to encounter a movie with a true feel for the sinister. In My Summer of Love , a startling coming-of-age drama set in a luminous green valley of the Yorkshire moors, Mona (Natalie Press), freckled and strawberry blond, with a slightly coarse adolescent sexiness that lights up whenever she thinks she's formed a connection to someone, is drawn into the orbit of Tamsin (Emily Blunt), who is posh and gorgeous, and damaged in ways we can't quite make out.
On paper, they're opposites. Mona, hiding beneath her hair (think Sissy Spacek's Carrie meets Peppermint Patty), drifts through the days, randy and vaguely depressed — often the same thing for a teenager. She's having sex with a local bloke who's too old for her, and she lives in a garret just over the pub run by her brother, Phil (Paddy Considine), a violent ex-con who has tried to escape his past by becoming an evangelical Christian. Tamsin, meanwhile, is spending the summer in her family's ivy-covered mansion. She's a creature of designer dresses and perfectly bred cheekbones, and even her tale of despair — her sister died of anorexia — carries a twinge of upper-crust chic.
As the two become friends, then lovers (the fact that both are female is treated as a casual nonissue), the writer-director Pawel Pawlikowski follows their relationship with a sophisticated grasp of the delights, secrets, and shared woes that can bring teenage girls together. Tamsin's cruelty is the wild card here (in a jolting scene, she uses her sexual  power to burn through Phil's Jesus-freak pieties), and the affair grows ominous and gothic under the lazy British sun. An austerely heightened tale of sensual anxiety, My Summer of Love  is shot in a gorgeous, saturated handheld style that recalls the Danish Dogmatists but also carries premonitions of perversity and dread that reach back to such Roman Polanski films as Knife in the Water  and Cul-de-Sac . Pawlikowski has made a romance that becomes a horror movie in which love, more than anything around it, is a delusionary fever to fear. Blunt and Press, each making her debut, create an ambiguous bond charged with rapturous suspicion. A prediction: My Summer of Love  will be the first of many acts for these two.

 Mona (Natalie Press), the heroine of Pawel Pawlikowski's lovely "My Summer of Love," lives in a bleak, picturesque Yorkshire village with her older brother, Phil (Paddy Considine), an ex-convict who found religion in prison. Phil, on a mission to "bring love to this valley," holds prayer meetings in the shuttered pub his parents used to run and spends his spare time building an enormous crucifix out of scrap metal.  Mona, in despair at what she sees as the loss of her brother, discovers a different, but in its own way no less mystical, kind of love. One day, after riding aimlessly around the hills on her motorless moped, she has a vision of a dark-haired girl riding a white horse. The girl turns out to be quite real, if somewhat enigmatic. Her name is Tamsin (the actress playing her is Emily Blunt), and she is whiling away the boarding school vacation in her parent's sprawling stone manor house.  Out of a mixture of boredom, curiosity and intuitive sympathy, the two girls start spending time together. Their relationship moves from the sisterly to the sexual and beyond, into the kind of feverish, all-consuming intimacy that makes everything else seem insubstantial. Mr. Pawlikowski, who started out making documentaries before turning to features with "The Last Resort" (2001), renders the dreamy intensity of their connection with entrancing lyricism. His long tracking shots, tight close-ups and abrupt shifts in perspective bring you into a private world that is erotic and also a little scary.  The scariness comes partly from the outside - in particular from Phil's desire to save Mona, which seems both predatory and protective - and from the volatility of Mona and Tamsin's contrasting temperaments. Mona confronts her unhappy prospects - a future, as she puts it, of working in a slaughterhouse, getting fat and raising mentally defective children - with grim, truculent wit. Tamsin, for her part, is more operatic, weeping over her sister's death and her father's philandering, and peppering her conversation with high-flown cultural allusions. "Have you read Nietzsche?" she asks Mona (who later goes home to tell Phil and his Bible group that God is dead.) "You'd like him. Also Freud."  The differences of class, the potency of the northern English landscape - and also, of course, the collision of sex and religion - suggest that a more apt reference might be D. H. Lawrence. (The film's actual literary source is a novel by Helen Cross, adapted by Mr. Pawlikowski and Michael Wynne).  The story "My Summer of Love" tells is modest; looking back on it, you may be surprised at how little has actually happened. But the film is a triumph of mood and implication. Mr. Pawlikowski - aided enormously by the director of photography, Ryszard Lenczewski, who turns sunlight into an active, nearly physical presence - makes the games and poses of adolescent infatuation feel grand and unsettling, as they do to Mona and Tamsin.  He also elicits three strong, subtle performances from his principal actors. Mr. Considine, who embodied English decency in "Last Resort," here plays a man whose inner torment is barely contained by his newfound spiritual discipline. He is a bad guy trying to confront his own rottenness, and in the process suppressing his capacity for genuine connection. Though Mona sees Phil's conversion as a betrayal - and though the film is mainly on her side - Mr. Considine makes him less a villain or a scapegoat than a fellow sufferer.  Tamsin, in some ways, is far more dangerous; of the three, she is the most clearly interested in power, and most skilled at manipulation. "You know I'm a fantasist," she tells Mona near the end, revealing the deepest, most wrenching difference between them. Her indulgence in make-believe is a luxury that Mona, who is by nature and circumstance a realist, can hardly afford.  Which is not to say that Mona is simply the victim of her brother's zeal or her lover's games. Quite the contrary: The film's tantalizing last shot confirms earlier premonitions of her toughness. And Ms. Press, who is for a time overshadowed by Ms. Blunt's seductive poise, lays claim not only to the audience's loyalty but to our stunned admiration.  This actress, making her film debut, has some of the changeling quality that the young Sissy Spacek brought to "Badlands" and "Carrie." The first impression is of a dreamy, vulnerable blankness, but this is quickly complicated, so that before long you are torn between being scared for Mona and being scared of her. Ms. Press may have a delicate, birdlike frame, but she's a falcon in sparrow's clothing.  "My Summer of Love" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has nudity, sex, profanity and some brief violence.

Direction, performances and lensing blend into an immensely satisfying, if almost uncategorizable, whole in Pawel Pawlikowski's "My Summer of Love," a tale of transient teenage love marbled with modern-Gothic weirdness. Terrific playing by rising young thesps Nathalie Press and Emily Blunt, against an irreal northern English landscape, make this the most accomplished work so far from Polish-born Pawlikowski, whose sophomore feature, grungy immigrant-center drama "The Last Resort," marked him as a helmer to watch four years ago. Beyond the festival circuit, specialized distribution looks rosy.
Pic is more inspired by than based on Helen Cross' 2001 novel, which was set during the '80s miners' strike and featured a series of murders as background. Script by Pawlikowski and Michael Wynne focuses almost entirely on the girls' idyllic, almost fairytale love story, with the addition of a wacko, born-again Christian brother.
In look and tone, film is completely different from Pawlikowski's first two TV features (including his first, journo saga "The Stringer"), both rooted in Brit-realist tube drama. "Summer" has a looser, almost Central European feel in its approach to character and landscape.
Sixteen-year-old Mona (Press) is a sparky, working-class Yorkshire girl in an unnamed town in a picturesque valley. Her elder brother Phil (Paddy Considine), a former con with a violent past, runs the local pub but, having suddenly found God, now wants to turn the hostelry into a spiritual center.
Out on the moors one balmy summer's day -- pic was shot during the 2003 heat wave, and has a tangible sultriness -- lonely Mona meets Tamsin (Blunt), a rich, well-educated girl who's her own age but seems considerably older with her snooty self-confidence. Both are looking for companionship -- Tamsin effectively lives alone in a large manse with her actress mom away and her father shagging his secretary -- and, after some teenage pranks together and dancing to an old Edith Piaf song, the two end up kissing in a mountain pool.
With its tight exposition and free-flowing style, film's first half-hour sweeps the viewer up into a world that seems to exist somewhere on the periphery of normality, entirely constructed by the two girls. The sense of dislocation, also evident in the witty, non-sequitur dialogue between the offhand Tamsin and down-to-earth Mona, continues as the weirdness multiplies.
Tamsin talks of a dead sister, whose bedroom is now a shrine. Meanwhile, Phil is building a massive cross that he and his followers carry up the hill overlooking the town, on a mission to expunge "the evil in the valley." As Tamsin and Mona pursue their clandestine affair, pledging love until death, Phil gets the idea that Tamsin is the devil incarnate.
Pic's whiffs of modern English Gothic recall movies like "The Wicker Man," as well as child-centered pics like "Our Mother's House." But finally it's just one more element of offbeat flavoring in a story of two neglected teens who pine for each other's qualities -- Mona's instinctiveness vs. Tamsin's cautiousness. The girls, one feels, aren't even career lesbians, more lonely souls at the mercy of their hormones.
Press, putting on a flawless Yorkshire accent, almost steals the movie as the ditzy Mona (real name: Lisa), a plain-but-pretty lass swept away by Tamsin's erudition and poise. But Blunt's perf as the mysterious, mixed-up Tamsin grows, adding a sense of menace which coincides with Considine's loony Phil.
Cinematography by Polish d.p. Ryszard Lenczewski creates a rural, summertime England that's recognizable but with a rough, northern, magical-realist flavor. Music by Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory isn't afraid to play up the big moments, adding to the film's evident desire not to fall into any neat, predetermined genre. Tight running-time is spot-on.

Last Resort , Pawel Pawlikowski 's previous film, was a pitch-perfect, post-Loachian portrait of refugee idleness in the lowlands of Kent , so astutely naturalistic it's hard to believe that it wasn't shot from behind a two-way mirror. My Summer of Love  is something else entirely—but what? At first blush, the Euro-indie moves are there: working-class Brit grit, unprettified (yet lovely) landscape, inarticulate characters fighting for connection. In fact, you could mistake it for the off-center, grim-light realism of Lynne Ramsay . Pawlikowski's heroine, Mona (Natalie Press), is a nasal, crude, off-putting creature, trapped in a small town and a defunct pub with her older brother (Paddy Considine ), who has found Christ. The prospects seem dire.
Slyly bearing an antiquated romance mag title and a witty score that evokes more than three genres of '60s cinema (including French Euro-horror), My Summer of Love  slowly evolves into an oddly affecting mood piece about lost girl–ness, the ethereal gist of which is all that was reportedly salvaged from Helen Cross 's busy source novel. At the outset, Mona meets the impossibly beautiful Tamsin (Emily Blunt ): one of them dirt-poor, uneducated, and hustling an engineless motorbike down the Yorkshire roads, the other high on a thoroughbred, cynical, and given to expounding the virtues of Nietzsche  and Edith Piaf . Press could pass for a malnutrition-disfigured Sissy Spacek  in her teen years, and insofar as Blunt plays a willowy, sophisticated brunette, the film's layout suggests a revisiting of Robert Altman 's Three Women . But nothing so schematic is in play. These two glum and wandering souls both nurse lonely wounds, and despite having very little else to talk about, bond at the hip, camp out in Tamsin's ivy-covered mansion, smoke a lot , and eventually have sex. When will the world come knocking?
It's a simple film, but not so elementary. Pawlikowski keeps the girls prickly and unforthcoming, and their courtship chat is unconvincing—they're acting for each other, and exactly how deeply the acting goes becomes the film's primary ponderable. For all the intimate visuals, the narrative textures aren't believable so much as iconic, striving toward a kind of pure cinema—a swoonable battery of gestures and images. Removed for most of the film from the possibility of dramatic context, the girls are abstracted down to hair and hoop earrings fluttering in the breeze, a brooding sisterhood of cigs, booze, and lazy fantasies of social rebellion.
The plot arrives, after a fashion, in the form of the brother's fragile evangelism, but not soon enough to shake the sense of My Summer of Love 's dreamy emptiness—a dicey affect that corresponds not only to Pawlikowski's depiction of born-again Christianity but to his heroines' self-delusional child's play. A giant crucifix is erected on a hilltop by the town's small band of Jesus lovers, but its looming presence signifies only hollow intent.
Pawlikowski is aware enough of social differentiation to not bludgeon us with it, and only in My Summer of Love' s final act does the submerged class warfare rise to the surface. But the movie creates a hermetic world; fittingly, real life has a difficult time puncturing its bubble. What's evident is that while first-timer Press inhabits her awkward nowhere girl ably enough, Blunt, who's done Brit TV, is already a star—opalescently gorgeous, half-lidded, and so dry in her deliveries she sounds innately contemptuous of everyone and everything. Her presence—particularly in one drowsy, defiant glance toward Considine, as Tamsin suns topless on a hillside—makes Pawlikowski's film hum with desire for the ideal.
