 “Nanking” is a swift, incisive documentary about one of the lesser-known horrors of the 20th century: the 1937 Japanese invasion of the Chinese city now called Nanjing, where more than 200,000 civilians and prisoners of war were slaughtered in a matter of weeks. The capital of the Republic of China at the start of World War II and the headquarters of the Chiang Kai-shek government, this attractive, cosmopolitan city of parks and thoroughfares was largely destroyed in what is known as the rape of Nanking.  Though some Japanese scholars dispute the statistics determined after the war by the International Military Tribunal for the Far East, it is widely agreed that during the occupation in 1937 and 1938, more than 20,000 rapes were also committed by the rampaging Japanese Army. In its concentrated savagery, the catastrophe was comparable to the even more numerous mass murders in Rwanda in 1994.  The film, directed by Bill Guttentag and Dan Sturman, has the format of a mixed-media theater piece. Interwoven with rare, vintage news clips of the city’s bombing, invasion and occupation are readings by actors from journals and letters kept by the few Westerners who remained in the city during the siege. Additional grisly firsthand recollections by now elderly Chinese survivors and Japanese soldiers tell a story that has become painfully familiar in the age of information overload: a collective fever of blood lust can lead to a kind of mass insanity in which the rules of civilized behavior are suspended.  “Nanking” suggests that in a world grown jaded by images of violence, written testimony read aloud still carries a weight that the most horrifying images cannot exert. Shown sparingly in the film, the pictures of the dead and seriously injured may sear your mind, but the act of recalling the unspeakable and giving it voice creates a deeper reality.  Many of the dozen witnesses are heroic men and women from Europe and the United States who remained in the city and saved thousands of lives by setting up a two-square-mile safety zone for the many thousands of civilians unable to evacuate.  Woody Harrelson reads the words of Bob Wilson, who was born in China, the son of an American missionary. He was the only surgeon to remain in Nanjing after the Japanese began bombing the city.  Mariel Hemingway speaks for Minnie Vautrin, a Christian missionary and chairwoman of the education department at Ginling College, who saved countless women from rape by hiding them from the marauding soldiers.  Jürgen Prochnow is John Rabe, an imperious German businessman and Nazi Party member, who used his status to try to halt the violence; when Mr. Rabe, who harbored 650 Chinese civilians on his estate, eventually returned to Germany, he was ordered never to speak of what he had seen.  Hugo Armstrong is John Magee, an Episcopal minister and amateur filmmaker who set up a hospital for wounded solders. “Nanking” includes excerpts from grainy 16-millimeter film he shot of the grotesquely disfigured  patients. His film was smuggled out of the country at considerable peril and only discovered in Germany in the 1980s.  Old photographs suggest that the actors were chosen because they bear some resemblance to the people they portray. They speak directly to the camera in the sober tones of witnesses at a human rights trial. Events are related more or less chronologically.  In August 1937, six years after the Japanese occupied Manchuria and established a puppet state, Japan began a full-scale invasion of China. While fighting a fierce ground war in Shanghai, Japan also began heavy air raids on Nanjing.  By the time the Japanese Army entered the walled city on Dec. 13, much of the population had fled, and only 22 Westerners remained. Mr. Wilson, Mr. Rabe and Mr. Magee were among the six people who formed a committee to establish the safety zone in the western part of the city for the remaining civilians.  Witnesses describe the awful uncertainty surrounding the zone’s creation. Would the Japanese agree to its formation? After it was established, would they respect its borders? As the rest of the city was burned and looted, the safety zone was regularly breached as the Army searched for Chinese soldiers disguised as civilians. But thousands of lives were saved.  What makes the film bearable is the knowledge that a few people did what they could to hold the line against humanity’s worst instincts. The voices in “Nanking” speak for the persistence of good in times and places where a moral crevice opens to reveal a vision of hell on earth.  “Nanking” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has gory images of war and harrowing accounts of rape and mutilation.

The horrific 1937-38 massacre of more than 200,000 Chinese during the early days of the Japanese occupation gets a polished presentation in "Nanking." Focusing on a handful of Western relief workers who set up a safety zone within the ravaged city and employing actors to read their letters and diaries, this hard-hitting if somewhat over-produced docu reps a vital addition to the small body of reportage on a tragedy whose repercussions continue to be a source of pain and controversy. Chilling subject matter will prove a tough sell theatrically but should find viewers willing to brave its horrors on cable.
Though it's a work of nonfiction, "Nanking" follows the "Schindler's List" model in using a story of survival and individual heroism to shed light on the unspeakable. Before the Japanese invaded the city on Dec. 13, 1937, Nanking, then China's thriving capital, was home to numerous European and American expats -- 22 of whom chose to stay behind to help the poor and dispossessed who were unable to flee the city in time. Their excerpted writings, as read by a group of actors, serve as the film's narrative framework.
Rather than relying solely on voiceover, directors Bill Guttentag and Bill Sturman (who scripted the film's text with Elisabeth Bentley) have thesps address their words directly to the camera. The prominent figures include Minnie Vautrin (Mariel Hemingway), head of a Christian missionary college; John Rabe (Jurgen Prochnow), a German businessman who attempted to use his Nazi Party influence to stop the carnage; minister John Magee, who set up a hospital to care for the wounded; and missionary George Fitch (John Getz).
Together, they established a makeshift safety zone that spanned two square miles and provided refuge for some 200,000 civilians (and soldiers pretending to be civilians). Although the Japanese soldiers managed to breach the zone, claiming to be in search of Chinese troops but killing indiscriminately, "Nanking" remarkably details how a few vastly outnumbered Westerners managed, to a certain extent, to keep their enemies at bay -- even suggesting that the presence of foreign onlookers stirred fear among the Japanese ranks.
Still, it's impossible to feel much uplift, given the film's unsparing account of the atrocities and the intensity with which they seemed to escalate before the violence subsided in March 1938. While the most notorious statistic may be the 20,000-plus women and young girls who were raped during the occupation, the film makes it clear that the Japanese soldiers were quite inventive in their methods of murder and torture.
Pic's trio of editors intercut the readings with devastating archival footage of the Japanese aerial and ground assaults, the juxtaposition of voices and images conjuring a vivid sense of life in the city as it was pillaged and burned. Yet while the actors serve to put a human face on heroism, there's a palpable, even distracting disconnect between the visual polish of these segments and the brutality of what they're describing.
More rewarding are the harrowing testimonies from Nanking survivors, including one of the few rape victims who wasn't killed immediately afterward. The film also incorporates a series of short but graphic films, made by one of the doctors, grimly detailing the wounds of the injured.
While the sleek 90-minute docu may not provide a definitive account on the order of Iris Chang's bestseller "The Rape of Nanking" (which inspired producer Ted Leonsis to make this film), the personalities it brings to light -- many of whom were forced to remain silent about what they'd seen after returning to their homelands -- are worthy of widespread exposure. The sad epilogue suggests that, 70 years after the massacre, the conversation between the Japanese and the Chinese about Nanking is just beginning.
 Camera (color/B&W archival), Buddy Squires; editors, Hibah Frisina, Charlton McMillan, Michael Schweitzer; music, Philip Marshall; associate producers, Bentley, Jo Ann Jacobs; line producers, Dylan Nelson, Katie Strand, Karen Lin. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 20, 2007. Running time: 90 MIN.
 


 
 


      

December 13 marks the 70th anniversary of the Japanese invasion of Nanking , at that time the capital of China, and the atrocities that followed; Iris Chang  chronicled these events (200,000 murders and more than 20,000 rapes within the first six weeks of the occupation) in The Rape of Nanking.  Chang's 2005 suicide at the age of 36 spurred businessman Ted Leonsis  to fund the production of Nanking , Bill Guttentag and Dan Sturman 's documentary on the subject. Focusing on a group of foreigners living in Nanking at the time of the invasion who formed a "Safety Zone" for the Chinese too poor to flee the city, Guttentag and Sturman intersperse readings by actors (including Woody Harrelson  and Mariel Hemingway ) of letters from the time with wrenching testimonials from Chinese survivors and archival footage. Most of the foreigners were Christian missionaries, with the notable exception of John Rabe , a German and Hitler  devotee: "There's a question of morality here," he wrote, explaining his decision to stay put, "and so far I haven't been able to sidestep it." When a Nazi's ethical core is pricked, attention should be paid. But it wasn't, the film reminds us, and one can't help but think of current corollaries and the documentaries to come: While the footage and survivors of Nanking are gray and decaying, its unbearable story is not something out of the past; the evil and ignorance it describes are alive and thriving today.
