         "New York Doll" is a documentary with the charm of the unexpected. It's a rock 'n' roll fairy tale involving fame and obscurity, feuds and friendship, glam rock and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. If that sounds like an unlikely combination, the reality is twice as improbable.
 
  Front and center in this genial tale is 55-year-old Arthur Kane, introduced wryly complaining about the Los Angeles bus system that takes him from his midcity home to his job servicing copy machines at the Westside's LDS Family History Center. "I've been demoted," he says at one point, "from rock star to schlep on the bus."
 


         






    Thirty years earlier, this man was Killer Kane, bassist in the influential cross-dressing glam rock band the New York Dolls, characterized by British singer Morrissey as "one of the most raucous, notorious bands in rock 'n' roll history."
 
  The combination of alcoholism (his own) and heroin addiction (two of his bandmates), feuds and bad decisions led to the breakup of the Dolls and Kane's decades-long estrangement from rock.
 
  In the interim, he'd converted to Mormonism after answering an ad in TV Guide, a development someone says is "like Donny Osmond becoming a New York Doll."
 
  That's when director Greg Whiteley, a fellow Mormon, met Kane in L.A. His plan was to do a small-scale documentary on this quirky, engaging individual, whose onstage immobility, one rock critic noted, made him "the only living statue in rock 'n' roll." That's when fate stepped in.
 
  For when Dolls fan Morrissey was named curator of London's 2004 Meltdown Festival, he asked the surviving Dolls (Kane, Sylvain Sylvain and frontman David Johansen) to put aside their past differences and reunite. To each other's amazement, they all agreed.
 
  While Kane's Family History Center colleagues, knowing how much of a dream this had been for him, pitched in so he could get his bass out of hock, director Whiteley managed to find financial backing and persuade filmmaker friends to accompany Kane to the pre-concert rehearsals in New York and the concert in London, the first music the man had played in long years. While many projects never get off the ground, this was one that was meant to be.
 
  "New York Doll" was also fortunate in its interview subjects. Aside from the thoughtful, articulate Morrissey, the film talks to celebrated Dollophiles including the Pretenders' Chrissie Hynde, the Clash's Mick Jones, Iggy Pop and Bob Geldof. And then there is Kane himself, who has a disarming quality all his own.
 
  Though it is small in scale and lasts only 78 minutes, "New York Doll," like any documentary, goes places we expect it to and places we do not. As journeys go, this is one to treasure.
 
 'New York Doll"New York Doll'
 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for drug content
 
 Times guidelines:
 Frequent references to drug use
 
 Released by First Independent Pictures. Director Greg Whiteley. Producers Ed Cunningham, Seth Gordon. Cinematographer Roderick Santiano. Editor Seth Gordon. Running time: 1 hour, 18 minutes.   

Surely there have been filmmakers who knew less about music going into their first music documentary than Greg Whiteley , but none springs to mind. (Ken Burns , maybe? Nah.) When Whiteley met Arthur Kane  in the Mormon temple both attended in L.A., he had never heard of the New York Dolls . His decision to film Kane after Dolls fanatic Morrissey  made a reality of the former bassist's pathetic dream of a band reunion was, it turns out, fortunate. Still, one wonders whether Whiteley has absorbed how frequently those who taste a moment of pop fame obsess on it ever after. Or that Kane's fame was only an intimation of the stardom he never got near. Or that Kane was easily the least talented of the Dolls.
"Arthur couldn't breathe and play bass at the same time," someone says early on, whereupon someone else explains that this is literal혰Kane would take a deep breath, play a barrage of notes, stop, take another breath, etc. Kane's technique did improve. But his limitations were a precondition of the punk forcebeat; he influenced Dee Dee Ramone , who had more chops, and Sid Vicious , who didn't. Towering mute and motionless in his platforms and tutus, clueless and awestruck and scary and lovable and proud, he completed the chemistry of a great band. But despite helpful interviews from an honor roll of old new wavers혰Iggy, Chrissie, Mick (Jones), Sir Bob혰who attended Morrissey's Meltdown Festival, Whiteley is too clueless himself to do more than surround any of this, and barely hints at Kane's pre-Dolls youth. Instead he mixes some Punk 101 into the story of a failed rock-and-roll hero whose life was saved by Joseph Smith .
Fortunately, this improbable protagonist is immensely touching whether taking the bus to his menial job at the Mormons' Family History Library or modeling a long concierge's coat in London. He loves the autograph hounds, the pecks on the cheek, the hotel room, the "delicious" food at (what someone else calls) a "hideous" banquet. Whiteley will have your sympathy describing Kane's 1989 conversion, and explaining how Kane's faith helps him allay his insecurities and get his guitars out of hock. When the bassist leads the band in a rather lengthy prayer before they embark on one of the most enthusiastically received reunion sets in history, you'll be damn glad everyone says amen.
Other subtleties, however, are lost. For someone who knows the Dolls' history, it's easy to imagine Kane both intimidated by and infatuated with the effortlessly charismatic David Johansen , who took over the band Kane had named in 1971 and dominated them till they disintegrated circa 1976혰and thus to understand both his paranoid resentment of Johansen's post-Dolls stardom (which never exceeded cultdom) and his relief that Johansen loves him as warmly and sarcastically as ever (which no one else would have doubted). But that doesn't mean it'll get through to the average Punk 101 student. In the end, this is less a film about a rock and roller than a film about a Mormon. And Napoleon Dynamite   it ain't.
