         Rodrigo García's "Nine Lives" is that rare episode film that actually accrues a cumulative power and doesn't merely proceed from one segment to the next. By the time it's over it has become a testament to the inner resilience of women in coping with a critical moment in their lives.
 
  Each sequence, unfolding powerfully in a single take, links deftly to the next with a smooth yet driving momentum, and individuals from one vignette turn up in another in an unobtrusive, credible manner that plays down coincidence to suggest instead the not-always-apparent interconnectedness in people's lives.
 


         






    Each segment seems perfectly shaped and timed, not lasting a second too long yet always of sufficient length to be satisfying in itself. García's large ensemble cast is impeccable, and he and his actors have created a film as memorable as it is subtle.
 
  An especially fine example of García's masterly control in developing a scene to its fullest is his second episode in which Robin Wright Penn's very pregnant Diana, while shopping at a Bel-Air gourmet grocery, encounters her first love, Damian (Jason Isaacs), whose inability to commit ended their relationship a decade earlier. Even though Damian has married, as has Diana, he instantly realizes he has never stopped loving her, and in his regret, selfishly resolves to force her to acknowledge that she feels the same way about him.
 
  Damian starts out in a low enough key that Diana, though thrown by running into him, is finding the chance meeting pleasant enough until he starts bearing down on her. Diana therefore finds herself in a very public place having to confront an unexpected and painful truth and then rise above it, holding on to her dignity and determination all the same. Wright Penn beautifully reveals Diana's increasing inner turmoil along with her determination not to lose her self-control.
 
  An especially harrowing sequence finds Lisa Gay Hamilton's Holly returning to her family home, waiting for her stepfather (Miguel Sandoval) to return from work, for a major showdown. In the meantime she has an anguished conversation with her younger sister Vanessa (Sydney Tamiia Poitier), whom she virtually raised, and it becomes clear that Holly has reached a point where she cannot move on with her life until she confronts her stepfather over what is pretty clearly his sexual abuse of her.
 
  A composed and kindly Holly turns up in the penultimate sequence as a nurse in a hospital where Kathy Baker's Camille is struggling to face up to the loss of a breast to cancer while being gently comforted by her husband (Joe Mantegna). The final sequence seems aptly placed, where a recent widow (Glenn Close) has taken her young daughter (Dakota Fanning) to visit her husband's grave. This exceptionally subtle sequence finds the mother, acknowledging the eternal cycle of life and death, focusing on creating a positive experience for her daughter but instead discovering how badly she needs the child's loving comfort.
 
  Other episodes find a teenager (Amanda Seyfried) attending to her wheelchair-using father (Ian McShane) so closely that he becomes concerned that she will sacrifice her life to his care while his wife (Sissy Spacek) secretly drifts toward infidelity (with Aidan Quinn). Holly Hunter's Sonia suddenly finds her lover (Stephen Dillane) revealing an intimate secret to another couple with whom they are having dinner.
 
  "Nine Lives" is a sophisticated, elegant-looking film shot in distinctive, wide-ranging L.A. locales, but its real terrain is the human heart, explored with compassion and respect.
 
 
'Nine Lives'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, sexual content and some violence
 
 Times guidelines:
 Adult themes, suitable for mature younger teens
 
  A Magnolia Pictures presentation. Writer-director Rodrigo García. Producer Julie Lynn. Executive producer Alejandro González Iñárritu. Cinematographer Zavier Pérez Grobet. Editor Andrea Folprecht. Music Edward Shearmur. Costumes Maria Tortu. Running time: 1 hour, 54 minutes.
 
  At selected theaters.   

In my favorite among the nonet of 10-minute scenes of women in crisis that make up the deeply satisfying feminine maypole dance billed, with mathematical precision, as Nine Lives , Robin Wright Penn plays a married woman, ripely pregnant, who runs into an old lover at a supermarket. The air between them is electric with unresolved feelings, and the woman truly doesn't know which way to turn: She tries this aisle and that to find her emotional way, while the camera follows her agitated indecision in one unbroken take.
Writer-director Rodrigo García (Things You Can Tell Just by Looking at Her ) trained as a cameraman, and his decision to present each segment in a single take enhances the be-here-now immediacy of every scene: Although each character holds the spotlight only briefly, she arrives as if with a life already in progress, and it's easy to believe that she'll keep busy even after the credits roll.
What could have been a parlor game becomes a surprisingly rich sketchbook, boosted by the work of fine actors invigorated by the opportunity to create character without hearing ''Cut!'' Glenn Close, Holly Hunter, Amy Brenneman, and Lisa Gay Hamilton join the troupe, and Sissy Spacek is especially affecting as a middle-aged woman on the verge of adultery. This movie is, by the way, not just an ovarian jungle: The equally strong male cast includes Stephen Dillane, Joe Mantegna, Ian McShane, and Aidan Quinn.

 During the final vignette of "Nine Lives," Rodrigo García's extraordinarily rich and satisfying suite of fleeting but intense moments in the lives of nine women, Maria (Dakota Fanning), a girl visiting a cemetery with her mother, Maggie (Glenn Close), notices a cat wandering on the lawn and wonders out loud if cats really have nine lives; her mother answers that she doesn't think so.  Maggie has spread out a picnic blanket in front of a modest tombstone that marks the grave of her husband or a close relative (the inscription is never shown nor is a name mentioned). Later, she stands guard behind a tree while her daughter urinates. At another point, she remarks at how amazing it is that people make it through life carrying so much heavy baggage.  This is how the moments unfold in the movie and in life, like the shadows of clouds skittering  across the lawn. While Maggie converses with her daughter, there is a split second in which her grief suddenly wells up, but she catches herself and swallows it. And in one slow, breathtaking shot, the camera pans 360 degrees to observe the trees and grass and to drink in the quiet of an eternal resting ground.  Although the vignette is set in a cemetery, it doesn't offer the sort of weepy closure that people go to the movies expecting to find. Nor do any of the film's eight other vignettes end in snug little epiphanies. Together, however, they add up to a film that may be the closest movies have come  to the cinematic equivalent of a collection of Chekhov short stories.  The film's reward for intense concentration is a feeling of deep empathy and connection. For once, you don't harbor the uneasy suspicion of having been emotionally manipulated. Given our immersion in the ways of Hollywood, the absence of that feeling may frustrate some moviegoers accustomed to getting the message in a neatly tied package.  In each vignette, filmed in one continuous Steadicam shot, a 10-to-14-minute slice of a different woman's life passes before your eyes in real time. The nuances of body language and details in the setting tell as much about the people in these stories as what is actually said.  Working with many of the actors who have appeared in his earlier mosaics, "Things You Can Tell Just by Looking at Her" (five vignettes) and "Ten Tiny Love Stories" (10 monologues), Mr. García has made a film that could be described as radically realistic. "Nine Lives" is a quantum leap better than its forerunners. In its subtle, understated performances, the actors vanish into characters who behave like ordinary people observed through one-way glass.  The movie begins in prison where an inmate, Sandra (Elpidia Carrillo), is visited by her young daughter and has a meltdown when the telephone connecting them for their five-minute monthly conversation fails. Sandra's treatment by the guards suggests she is an unruly prisoner, and this chapter leaves you with a chill of foreboding about her future in or out of jail.  It would be stretching a metaphor to say that all nine of the stories' focal characters are in some way imprisoned, unless the concept of imprisonment is meant to imply the notion of life itself as a kind of confinement. But Mr. García, the son of the Colombian writer Gabriel García Márquez, is too discreet and subtle a storyteller to voice the theme in more than a murmur.  With a Chekhovian objectivity and compassion, he brings to his characters' struggles and pains an evenhanded awareness of how the ties that bind also inevitably chafe. Diana (Robin Wright Penn), the second story's focal character, is a married, very pregnant woman with trouble in her face who runs into an old lover (Jason Isaacs), also now married, while in a supermarket. Erotic sparks fly, and she is gripped by the familiar, scary feeling of disappearing in his presence.  Holly (Lisa Gay Hamilton), an enraged African-American woman in the third vignette, returns to her childhood home to confront her estranged stepfather over childhood wounds that may have involved sexual abuse. In the fourth story, Sonia (Holly Hunter) and her boyfriend (Stephen Dillane) have a revealing fight while visiting the elegant new apartment of their closest friends (Mr. Isaacs and Molly Parker). Samantha (Amanda Seyfried), the beautiful, bright, teenage protagonist of the fifth vignette, resists leaving her disabled father (Ian McShane) and long-suffering mother (Sissy Spacek), to attend an elite Eastern college, for to leave would mean forsaking her role as parental go-between in an undeclared war.  Ms. Spacek's character is one of several in the movie to appear in more than one vignette. In the episode "Ruth," she has a secret motel rendezvous with a Scotch-swilling boyfriend (Aidan Quinn) on the night of a full moon.  In one of the rawest vignettes, Lorna (Amy Brenneman) finds herself an uneasy guest at the funeral of her ex-husband's wife. When the widower, who is deaf and communicates mostly in sign language, drags her aside and confesses his lingering passion for her, she is forced to acknowledge her contribution to the wife's suicide.  Anyone who has ever faced surgery can identify with Camille (Kathy Baker), a woman awaiting a mastectomy, who expresses her terror of "no consciousness" while under anesthesia and her horror at being "at the mercy of others" to her patient husband (Joe Mantegna).  As "Nine Lives" winds it way from a prison to a cemetery with stops in many houses along the way, it walks a tightrope. Any glitch in a film this committed to a delicate, slightly heightened realism, risks throwing the whole thing off the track. You hold your breath waiting for that false moment to arrive, and you heave a sigh of amazement and relief when it doesn't.  "Nine Lives" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity and sexual situations.
There's something confining about the title of Rodrigo García 's Nine Lives , a series of vignettes on mundanely horrific episodes in the lives of nine SoCal women. During part one, as we watch Elpidia Carrillo 's character righteously haul off on prison guards, it dawns that we're in for eight more slices of life about sliced lives. In yet another roundelay that, like Crash  and Heights , follows the Short Cuts  template of cosmic interconnection, we're reminded that one woman's oncology nurse is another man's estranged, gun-wielding daughter; that one woman's emotionally sadistic ex-boyfriend is the object of another couple's acute class envy. The short-story glimpses aim for Carver-esque pang, though the script could have used some Lorrie Moore  bite. Some actors fare better than others in the crucible of continuous-shot segments. Riffs that work include pregnant Robin Wright Penn 's grocery store encounter with that troublesome old flame, Holly Hunter 's attempts to mitigate her husband's jealousy of her friends' success, and Kathy Baker 's testy, terrified pre-mastectomy conversation with husband Joe Mantegna . The pitch is off, however, in Sissy Spacek 's bit as caretaker of a deteriorating husband (it doesn't help that the distracted camera keeps plunging into daughter Amanda Seyfried 's shirt) and Amy Brenneman 's pop-in to the funeral of her former husband's wife, during which her ex, a deaf man, pitches for sympathy sex by furtively signing about nostalgic masturbation. Littered throughout are various underscorings of the fact that we're all connected—mates in that special sadness best embodied by recurring, overripe piano plunks.
