The credits for “Ninja Assassin’’ list two screenwriters and one director. But it’s fair to say the movie has come straight out of a box. Cobbled together from the instructions of assorted Hong Kong gangster bloodbaths and whatever the French superproducer Luc Besson did last, this long, thanklessly repetitive slice-kick-and-shoot-’em-up has nothing to offer but the aggravating awareness that Jet Li and Jason Statham have done it better.
“Ninja Assassin’’ presents the young martial artist Rain. He has one name, one facial expression, and many ways to dodge a bullet. With a modicum of charisma, Rain plays Raizo, a top assassin who finds himself working against the ninja sect that trained him as a boy. As a man, Raizo  is stealthy and taciturn, spending most of the movie headed toward various confusingly assembled, digitally enhanced showdowns set in such inevitable locations as empty warehouses and anonymous office buildings.
His partner for most of these chases is a Europol researcher in Berlin (Naomie Harris) who has just figured out that the ninjas are hired killers (for 100 pounds of gold, they’re yours). Now she and Raizo  are both wanted  - namely, by his head-ninja father (the esteemed martial artist Sho Kosugi). The movie doles out flashbacks to young Raizo’s  ninja conscription (if you squint, a terrorist-recruitment angle materializes) and the traumatizing disappearance of the fellow ninja he loves.
Whenever the ninjas descend on Raizo,  the soundtrack fills with jazzily hissed words: “traitor,’’ “vengeance,’’ “kill,’’ “bring him to father.’’ It’s like Bob Fosse night at the martial-arts studio. Most of the killing here is done with bladed throwing stars that, like the ninjas themselves, arrive from nowhere. They appear to have been used to edit the film as well.
“Ninja Assassin’’ was directed by a protégé of the Wachowski brothers, James McTeigue, who made the similarly incoherent “V for Vendetta.’’ This new movie is also driven by mayhem. But unlike “Vendetta’’ the source isn’t a graphic novel. It’s the filmmakers’ incompetence. “Ninja Assassin’’ showcases a half-comical, half-appalling indifference to common sense. At some point a medic shows up and examines someone with a gunshot wound. He doesn’t bat an eyelash at the gentleman who looks like he just finished the “Passion of the Christ’’ workout.
The whole film culminates in a long, wasteful session of shooting and slashing between the police and the ninjas. It may be the first grisly action sequence to be objectionable solely on the grounds that it’s boring.
.

The folks at the MPAA must have been snoozing when Ninja Assassin  came up for its rating. Because this slick slice of martial-arts mayhem from the producers of The Matrix  is awash in blood. It spurts and sprays in geysers. And it never lets up. There's a brutal (and admittedly very cool) fight scene every five minutes. What story there is revolves around a ninja (Korean pop star Rain) who teams with a sassy Europol agent (Naomie Harris) to get payback on the clan who trained him to be a heartless assassin. But let's be honest, killing is this film's business...and business is good.


 The best thing about “Ninja Assassin” is its refreshingly honest title: unlike those few, unwary souls who rush to “Precious” solely on the strength of its twee title and happy-go-lucky television trailers, no one who sees “Ninja Assassin” can reasonably complain about the violence.  Which is just as well, because this saga, set in Berlin, is more committed to its bloodletting than to any of its characters. The plot, when glimpsed between flying body parts, concerns Raizo (the South Korean former boy-band member Rain), a rogue ninja with a grudge against the clan that abducted him as a child and killed his ninja honey.  That makes him very useful to Mika (Naomie Harris), an Interpol-style cop who suspects world governments of hiring ninjas to do their dirtiest deeds. If only Raizo would keep his shirt on, then maybe she could concentrate enough to prove it.  Perhaps in homage to his rippling star (whose martial arts prowess I’m not qualified to judge but whose hotness, whether throwing knives or folding laundry, is self-evident), the director, James McTeigue, rarely misses an opportunity to drench the film in water.  Flashbacks to ninja training school — first love, first wounds, first downpour — are quite lovely, making us wish that the film had remained in the past and avoided the present-day blurs of shadowy, red-and-black action.  Ninjas may be slippery when wet, but if we learned anything from Indiana Jones, it’s that bullets trump sharp objects every time.  “Ninja Assassin” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Bodies are halved, beheaded, dismembered and consigned to an eternal “spin” cycle.

Seemingly made to capitalize on a dubious CG innovation -- namely, the slicing of bodies in half by whizzing five-pointed stars -- "Ninja Assassin" has little else to recommend it, not even laughs. Working again with the Wachowski brothers as producers, director James McTeigue delivers a lower-brow, somewhat livelier work than the team's "V for Vendetta." But unless the viewer is easily delighted by ultraviolence for its own sake, this thinly plotted movie about a young ninja's revenge against his cruel trainers will disappoint. Warner Bros.' Nov. 25 release should nonetheless prove effective as holiday-season counterprogramming, at least in the short term.
Korean pop star Rain conjures only a mild drizzle as Raizo, a limber bone-snapper trained from a young age by a secret society of child-abducting killer-for-hire ninjas. Early flashbacks reveal Raizo to have been taken in as an orphan by the Ozunu Clan, which he defies by running away in the wake of his sweetheart's murder by cold-blooded Lord Ozunu (Sho Kosugi).
The pic's present-day action, set in Berlin, revolves around Mika Coretti (Naomie Harris), a gorgeous Europol agent whose latenight sleuthing uncovers a financial connection between recent political assassinations and the Ozunu. Naturally, the agent herself is targeted for assassination, as chief Ozunu baddie Takeshi (Rick Yune) and his blade-tossing ninja comrades come West to forcibly halt the investigation. As if possessed of psychic powers, Raizo, hiding out in Europe, senses a chance to save a lovely lady where he had failed in the same task years before.
Eventually the film leads to a Europol-led shootout and a pair of unmemorably acrobatic duels between Raizo and his two archrivals -- "older brother" Takeshi and raspy-voiced "father" Ozunu.
Though "Ninja Assassin" is implausible on countless levels, Raizo's training to feel nothing at least gels with Rain's ability to emote nothing. Harris, a strong presence in Michael Mann's "Miami Vice" feature, acquits herself capably here, reacting believably to the incessant carnage around her.
Of course, the film's raison d'etre is precisely its blood-soaked combination of physical stunts and digital trickery, the latter favored to a fault. While not remotely on par with the Wachowskis' "bullet time" f/x in "The Matrix," the ridiculous torrent of flying blades and flayed flesh here does appear unique in technological terms, and certainly pushes the pic's R rating to its limits.
Indeed, such is the film's level of insinuated gore that the frustratingly dark texture of many fight-scene shots can perhaps be explained by a post-production bid to avoid an NC-17. Whatever the case, the shadowy action is too often incomprehensible, except in the general sense that heads, limbs and torsos are being severed in massive numbers.
If there's a sick joke to be had from this sort of human meat-carving, it isn't found by McTeigue and his key collaborators, including conventionally quick-cutting editors Gian Ganziano and Joseph Jett Sally.
Where the pic does excel is in its immersive sound design, as swords, chains and myriad other weapons seem to sail around the theater, at times helping to clarify the dimly lit action.
Camera (color/B&W, widescreen), Karl Walter Lindenlaub; editors, Gian Ganziano, Joseph Jett Sally; music, Ilan Eshkeri; production designer, Graham "Grace" Walker; supervising art director, Sebastian T. Krawinkel; set decorator, Peter Walpole; costume designer, Carlo Poggioli; sound (Dolby/DTS/SDDS), Ivan Sharrock; supervising sound editor, Eric Lindemann; visual effects supervisors, Chas Jarrett, Dan Glass, Jeppe N. Christensen, Bjorn Mayer, Matt McDonald, Christopher Townsend; special effects supervisor, Uli Nefzer; stunt coordinators, Chad Stahelski, Noon Orsatti; fight choreographers, Jon Valera, Peng Zhang; assistant director, Terry Needham; casting, Lucinda Syson. MPAA rating: R. Reviewed at Vancouver Film Festival (Special Presentations), Oct. 13, 2009. (Also in Fantastic Fest, Austin.) MPAA Rating: R. Running time: 99 MIN.
 


Isn't that a tautology—both ninja and  assassin? Redundancy aside, having braved zombies in 28 Days Later , Naomie Harris  now faces a centuries-old clan of ninjas who have been hiring themselves out, Blackwater-style, as government mercenaries. Sad to say, the undead were more fun. Directed by James McTeigue  (V for Vendetta ), and with Joel Silver  and the Wachowskis as producers, Ninja Assassin  is a hard-R blood-fest with much CG and many severed limbs. Eurocop Harris  discovers the ninjas' secret role in black-ops history, so, naturally, they come after her—that's the entire plot. But one Bourne-like rogue ninja (South Korean pop star Rain) does try to protect her from the silent swarm of sword-wielding assassins. (Strict traditionalists, ninjas here appear incapable of driving, using guns or cell phones, or smiling.) Because, however, ninjas love the shadows and abhor the light, most of their battles are murky and difficult to follow. (Try to count the screams, arterial geysers, and fallen limbs, then do the math; the ninjas always win.) With a passable smirk, 300 -style abs, and limited English, Rain has zero chemistry with Harris; indeed, they spend half the movie apart. (Interminable flashbacks to his early training are like a ninja Hogwarts , complete with magical powers and puppy love.) A triple-cross plot with Harris's superiors doesn't help the movie's clarity—neither does the clattering sound design. Shouldn't throwing stars be silent ? If they're gonna sound like gunshots, why not just use guns?
