 “No Impact Man” is a documentary about Colin Beavan, author of a blog and book of the same name. The title of this multifarious, multimedia project is, if not exactly disingenuous, at least somewhat double edged. For a year Mr. Beavan and his family turned their small Manhattan apartment into the site of an experiment in radical nonconsumption. They forewent many of the conveniences of modern life — from coffee to electricity to toilet paper — in order to minimize their use, direct and indirect, of carbon-based fuels. But even as he and his wife, Michelle Conlin, organized their daily routines to have the least possible environmental impact, Mr. Beavan, a freelance writer, was working to maximize the cultural and ideological impact of his enterprise.  The year of doing something crazy to learn a lesson or prove a point is by now less a gimmick than a full-fledged publishing genre. Activities that would, in the course of ordinary life, count as modest or private undertakings acquire a special significance when they become the basis of book proposals. A. J. Jacobs followed numerous  biblical commandments  (there are a lot more than 10); Morgan Spurlock ate nothing but fast food; Julie Powell cooked her way through Julia Child’s “Mastering the Art of French Cooking.” And Mr. Beavan, in a similarly self-displaying if more austere spirit, weaned himself, Ms. Conlin and their young daughter from motorized transportation, nonlocal food and light bulbs.  His intentions, as stated in the film and on his blog, were indisputably virtuous. By pushing himself further than even the most conscientious recyclers and locavores are usually willing to go, Mr. Beavan hoped to raise awareness both about the ecological costs of overconsumption and about possible solutions to the problem. These goals are, conveniently, as impossible to measure as they are to criticize. They also rest on an unexamined investment in the culture of celebrity and publicity, which, while perhaps less globally destructive than carbon-burning consumerism, can have a corrosive effect on individual dignity and collective morality. The main purpose of the year of no impact was to justify, and to raise awareness of, the project itself.  Taken as a polemical documentary championing environmentally conscious action, “No Impact Man,” directed by Laura Gabbert and Justin Schein, is of little interest and less utility. It provides no new scientific insights or political arguments, and celebrates various behavioral changes without assessing their value or importance. Mr. Beavan’s evangelical, self-congratulatory demeanor has the effect, especially early in the film, of playing to the unfortunate perception that what drives many environmentalists is, above all, the need to feel superior to their neighbors and fellow citizens.  “No Impact Man,” however, is not really an eco-documentary. There are plenty of those. But there are not many films that so unsparingly (if also, perhaps, inadvertently) expose the confused power dynamics of a certain kind of modern middle-class marriage. Whatever else he is doing, Mr. Beavan is, by laying down a new and draconian set of household laws, dramatically asserting his own authority in the domestic sphere. A thoroughly modern dad, who does most of the cooking and dishwashing and whose wife goes off each day to work in the offices of BusinessWeek, he is a paragon of sensitive patriarchy.  As Ms. Conlin points out to her husband, the blog  and the book (and now the movie) are called “No Impact Man,” not “No Impact Family.”  But this doesn’t mean that she’s exempt, only that he’s in charge. When she asks for permission to drink coffee to help her through a work deadline, Mr. Beavan scolds and pouts and guilt-trips her for breaking protocol, all the while claiming that he doesn’t really care if she does or not. But even after the lights have gone out and the refrigerator has been replaced by a giant flowerpot lined with sand, enough electrical power is found to keep Mr. Beavan’s laptop going. He has a blog (noimpactman.typepad.com) to write, after all.  Later, when Ms. Conlin wants to discuss the possibility of having a second child — a sibling for their adorable 2-year-old daughter, Isabella — Mr. Beavan complains that having such a conversation on camera is too much like reality television. Further, he says he can see no connection or parallel between his investment in the no-impact project and her desire for more kids.  The filmmakers found their way to “No Impact Man” because Ms. Gabbert is a longtime friend of Ms. Conlin, whose side the film, at first, seems implicitly to take in a simmering marital battle. Mr. Beavan comes across as a passive-aggressive zealot, and when  — in the wake of an article in The  New York Times  about the family —  his wife receives messages from strangers urging her to dump him, it’s hard not to see their point. Not that she is entirely admirable. Needy and indecisive, she seems like the weaker, less imaginative member  of the couple.  But  then about halfway through, just as you start to think you can’t stand another minute(much less six more months) with these people, the film executes a quietly surprising turn. Mr. Beavan starts to seem more humble and less domineering, and Ms. Conlin turns from whiny camp follower into skeptical good sport. The family bikes around the city and cooks organic food by candlelight, and the no-impact regimen mutates from family issue to family adventure.  Not everyone will want to come along. And I remain unconvinced that the cause of planetary rescue will be advanced very far by what is, in the end, an elaborate stunt. But as a professional writer, a New York husband and a man with a compost bin, an organic-produce fetish and a guilty conscience, I can’t, in the end (all appearances to the contrary), judge Mr. Beavan or this film too severely. Making an impact is easy. Making a difference is hard.

Proof that "eco" and "entertainment" aren't mutually exclusive, "No Impact Man" may be a socially progressive, environmentally conscious film, but it goes down far easier than, say, an all-natural, fiber-enriched peanut butter sandwich without a glass of soy milk. It's that rare doc (these days) that could go theatrical, largely because it's a film about a couple, more than a movement. In fact, at the risk of causing domestic discord, this Laura Gabbert-Justin Schein film might have been called "No Impact Woman." 
Michelle Conlin is not the movie's principal character - that would be her husband, Colin Beavan, whose goal is to spend one year leaving as small a carbon footprint as inhumanely possible. And he's taking the family with him as he jumps over the crunchy, caffeine-less cliff.
Conlin doesn't really want to go. Providing the humor and the skepticism, she becomes the audience's stand-in as Beavan (who's planning a book on the project) imposes a suddenly Spartan way of life on his daughter and wife -- who really likes her Starbucks lattes and taxi cabs. "Daddy does nature," she tells little Isabella, as their Greenwich Village apartment becomes home to compost eating worms and improvised refrigeration. "Mommy does retail." When the couple carts all their unnecessary stuff to a thrift store, Conlin wants to buy the Marc Jacob handbag in the window.
But it's Conlin who becomes the convert to the cause: While Beavan's book brings his passion into question, Conlin really comes to believe in what they're doing, despite such deprivations as no electricity, no out-of-season produce and, worst of all, no caffeine. As such, "No Impact Man," becomes the best kind of propaganda, as well as a very entertaining movie.
Production values are fine, with Schein's often on-the-fly camerawork a standout.

The bold environmental project Colin Beavan  began in the fall of 2006—to expunge his carbon footprint by giving up material consumption, electricity, non-local foods, and basically all worldly pleasures in Manhattan for one full year—was always destined to have some naysayers crying "publicity stunt." And to an extent, it is. Timed to coincide with the release of Laura Gabbert  and Justin Schein 's entertaining doc chronicle of Beavan's year in self-righteous hell, his new eco-martyr memoir of the same name is subtitled "The Adventures of a Guilty Liberal Who Attempts to Save the Planet and the Discoveries He Makes About Himself and Our Way of Life in the Process," which both doubles as a lofty plot synopsis and pre-emptively deflects critics with that "guilty liberal" confession. Unfolding mostly as real-time vérité, the film is less valuable for detailing Beavan's expensive and punishing process to become greener than that jolly giant (he buys composting "worm boxes," for God's sake) than it is for showing his deeply hesitant wife, Michelle Conlin —who laments her inability to dine at Pastis or buy iced quad espressos—give in to this decidedly un-fun lifestyle. We could all do better, definitely (be sure to sneak in your reusable bottles instead of buying from the concession stand!), but how much can we possibly glean from a guy whose idealism can be measured with a calendar?
