Derek Charles (Idris Elba) has it all. He's the executive vice president of a Los Angeles asset-management firm that's thriving exactly as it would in a movie conceived before the economic crisis. He's moving his family into an impossibly spacious, polished-oakwood-floor dream house. And he's married to a woman so radiant and gorgeous and soulful that she's played by Beyoncé Knowles. What could spin things wrong? Try the arrival, in Derek's office, of a new temp assistant (Ali Larter) who's a vicious erotic predator with perfectly tapered flaring nostrils.
Obsessed  is an obvious gloss on Fatal Attraction , a movie that has lived in the popular imagination for more than two decades because of how splendidly it squeezed Hitchcockian thrills out of an addled, sexually complicated, real-life messiness. Glenn Close, as the other woman scorned, may have been playing a feminist Medusa, but her rage at being tossed away after an affair spoke to a new world in which women, leveraging their power, had rewritten the rules of attraction. It's doubtful that Obsessed  will stick in the popular imagination for more than two weeks, because the movie is borderline ludicrous, and it jams its characters into rigid slots. Larter, as the office temptress who just about sexually assaults our hero, is a total psycho obsessed — and unhinged — from the get-go, and Knowles' Sharon (who met her husband when she  was his assistant) is jealous before she's even laid eyes on her rival. As for Derek, he has none of the fascinating culpability of Michael Douglas in the earlier film. He's guilty of nothing more than fatal flirtation.
It's hard to shake the feeling that Obsessed  regurgitates Fatal Attraction 's adultery plot, minus any actual adultery, because the director, TV veteran Steve Shill, and the screenwriter, David Loughery, are copping out. The movie wants to tease us with intimations of a steamy biracial liaison; it just doesn't want to actually go there. If Derek is innocent, then once Larter's vamp starts to invade his private space and pretend that they've had a mad affair, why doesn't he just clear things up by, you know, talking to his wife? The bizarre, paranoid premise of Obsessed  is that Knowles — and, by extension, any good stand-by-your-man wife these days — is more than just loyal; she's a high-maintenance Force To Be Reckoned With. And so even though Derek is innocent, she views him as guilty. This puts the wife and the un-mistress in the odd position of acting like secret sisters locked in collusion over their destruction of a man's integrity. And when Christine Lahti shows up, as the world's most gullible police investigator (naturally, she believes the stalker), her myopia just makes her the third leg of the sisterhood.
Obsessed  has little plausibility, but at moments it's an entertaining bad movie, and the performers are vivid. Elba, the gifted British actor best known as a regular on The Office , gives Derek a moneyed, middle-class solidity without ever suggesting that it's dulled his senses. Larter is so sorority-bitch insincere she makes you hate her on sight. And Knowles takes the ridiculous role of a diva-housewife and makes it play...without rendering it any less ridiculous. The climactic catfight is so over-the-top that about all it's missing is Tyler Perry's Madea, popping out of the woodwork to wave her tiny gun at the blonde home-wrecker.


Don't expect a pot full of boiling bunnies, because nothing so creatively crazy ever happens in "Obsessed," a "Fatal Attraction"-inspired predatory-female domestic thriller that spends much time spinning its wheels and making auds practically beg for an explanation to all the madness and obsession. Beyonce Knowles may be the big B.O. draw in this Stephen Shill-helmed psychodrama, which topped the weekend B.O. with a surprising $28.5 million opening, but she's barely a supporting player: The movie belongs to Ali Larter, who's long overdue for some kind of bigscreen breakout. 
Sultry blonde Larter ("Heroes") plays office temp/temptress Lisa Sheridan, who isn't even off the elevator at her latest job before she's set her psychotic sights on Derek (Idris Elba), a good-looking, happily married, up-and-coming investment broker at a flourishing downtown Los Angeles firm. Derek and wife Sharon (Knowles), who have a kid, have just moved into a cavernous old house with a wobbly attic floor and a glass-top table directly underneath it downstairs (remember this later!).
They seem the picture of contentment, save for Sharon's obvious unhappiness with the fact that Derek has a new female assistant. "I want her fired immediately," Sharon says (so much for sisterhood), and no one seems to think this marks any instability in what is soon to be one plutonium-enriched domestic partnership. But Derek, it seems, met Sharon at work, too (cue the organist).
Sharon doesn't leave a good impression, but Derek is the picture of marital fidelity: No matter how slinkily Lisa comports herself, Derek says no, thanks. Derek is believable enough; not so Lisa, whose inappropriate antics wouldn't be tolerated for five minutes in today's sexual harassment-conscious corporate atmosphere. David Loughery's screenplay never provides any explanation for why she is who she is: She has no motives other than mad obsession (which isn't that interesting, really; even the Wicked Witch of the West had reasons), and she has no backstory: Unless her temp agency recruits its workers outside Home Depot, Lisa would have to have references, and she would have to have acquired them from somewhere outside the mental-health community.
If Derek had actually slept with Lisa, a la Michael Douglas in "Fatal Attraction," "Obsessed" would at least have had the spurned-woman gambit to play, however hoary. But Shill and Loughery aren't overly concerned with plausibility: There isn't one woman in a position higher than secretary at Derek's firm, and this alone makes the pic as shaky as Derek's attic floor. The seldom-seen Christine Lahti does play the requisite detective, albeit one who has a tendency to show up just as the action has come to an end.
Bruce McGill is his usual sturdy self as Derek's boss, but Jerry O'Connell gives one weird performance as his office pal, Ben. Ben may be in love with Derek. It seems to be an unhealthy trend.
Production values are good, notably the editing by veteran Paul Seydor.
