
More than a simple record of a couple of embedded helmers in Iraq, "Occupation: Dreamland" gives voice to usually tightlipped GIs in and around the volatile city of Fallujah. Docu helmers Garrett Scott and Ian Olds offer a sympathetic look at the average Joe doing duty in hell -- as well as a sharp indictment of the Pentagon's cavalier support for the troops. Obvious political tone may hamper small-screen play, but fests and rep houses should keep circulation high.
Scott and Olds joined up with a unit of the 82nd Airborne Division in the early days of 2004, at their base facetiously known as Dreamland. A motley group of mostly twentysomethings, the soldiers are charged with maintaining order and suppressing resistance, but with no sensitivity training, it's inevitable the locals treat them with fear and suspicion.
Many still aren't sure why they're even in Iraq: One soldier shrugs off the question with, "I guess someone smarter than me knows what's going on." Others feel their blood is being exchanged for oil. Helmers don't need to pry too hard to get diverse opinions, ranging from gung-ho warriors hepped up for action to quiet introspective types insecure in their role as occupier.
Using night lenses, the camera follows the unit in an evening raid, revealing women and children huddled on the floor in fear and hatred, their reflective eyes like animals in a spotlight.
Back at the base, in an especially chilling exchange, a recruitment officer tells the soldiers they have nothing else in their lives anyway, encouraging them to re-enlist, with the argument that they'll never be able to reintegrate into civilian life. Docu ends with Marines coming in to replace the strung-out unit just before the devastating siege of Fallujah.
Fearlessly following their subjects in all sorts of confrontations, Scott and Olds manage to keep a steady and objective eye without outside narration. Considering the frequently dangerous set-ups, sound quality is surprisingly crisp.
Camera (color, DV), Olds, Scott; editor, Olds; sound, Jim Dawson. Reviewed at Rotterdam Film Festival (PS Homefront USA), Jan. 30, 2005. (Also in South by Southwest Film Festival.) Running time: 79 MIN.
 


Reeling from the rhetorical toxicity of the 2004 election, some members of the punditocracy, tiring of red-versus-blue gridlock and convinced the problem must be the message and not the messengers, began to wonder aloud if it's still possible to convince anyone of anything in today's America. For political documentarians seeking cooler temperatures after the year of Fahrenheit 9/11 , it's a practical matter: how to transcend partisanship without losing sight of the very real issues at stake in the argument?
Co-directors Garrett Scott and Ian Olds  suggest one solution in the terrific Occupation: Dreamland , a fair-minded (but hardly apolitical) grunt's-eye view of the war in Iraq  that trusts the audience to draw its own conclusions. The filmmakers lived with members of the army's 82nd Airborne Division  near Falluja  for several weeks in early 2004, just months prior to the coalition siege that led to the partial destruction of the city. We get to know several of the unit's colorful personalities as they go about the occupation routine: after-dark raids rendered in night vision green, a weekly gig providing security for city council meetings, and—in keeping with the nature of asymmetrical modern warfare—a whole lot of sitting around waiting to be attacked.
Indeed, boredom seems to be the primary mode here. Contrary to the Pentagon  line, the soldiers seem less concerned about home front criticism of the war than about their efforts simply going unnoticed by a self- absorbed civilian population. As one puts it, "People want their steak, but they don't want to know how that cow gets butchered." One bit of downtime finds the squad members arguing over the merits of the occupation. The ranking sergeant's somewhat hesitant warning against on-camera criticism of the administration provides a comic segue to another soldier blasting Cheney and Halliburton  in private. Coercion also comes in more passive-aggressive forms—as in the endless string of mandatory meetings held to discourage troops from getting out of the army at the end of their enlistments (at least three soldiers featured in the film have done just that).
Given the avowed anti-war sympathies of both directors, administration apologists may wish to write off Dreamland  as a cynical attempt to outflank the support-the-troops crowd, but Scott  and Olds make no attempt to pass off the soldiers' doubts as a political argument (and indeed, others speak in favor of the invasion). The movie gains anti-war traction by keeping its focus on the ground, avoiding a conscious agenda even as it undercuts a key assumption behind the administration's "stay the course" argument: that the situation in Iraq is improving. We hear a litany of complaints from locals about basics like water, gas, electricity, and security and come to understand how the lack of concrete results in these areas has damaged Iraqis' perception of their alleged benefactors. As one soldier says, "They don't give a shit about us."
The Dreamland  of the title refers to the unit's nickname for the former Baathist  resort that serves as its barracks and to Bush's delusional view of Iraq that, among other things, forecast that the American invaders would be greeted as liberators. What they have become, of course, is occupiers , forced to humiliate their hosts just to guarantee their own  security. We watch the soldiers raiding houses, taking women prisoner over the strenuous objections of the local men, and in retrospectively chilling imagery, placing hoods over the faces of captives. One doesn't need foreknowledge of Falluja's bloody fate to sense a storm coming.
