 We shall not cease from exploration  And the end of our exploring  Will be to arrive where we started  And know the place for the first time.  These lines, from “Little Gidding,” the last of T. S. Eliot’s “Four Quartets,” have an abstract, mystical cast. But when the British filmmaker Terence Davies recites them in his cinematic memoir “Of Time and the City,” they acquire a bracing and poignant specificity.  Mr. Davies started in Liverpool, the eponymous city in this lovely, astringent film and the setting for much of his other work, including “Distant Voices, Still Lives” (1988),  “The Long Day Closes” (1992) and the trilogy made up of  “Children,” “Madonna and Child” and “Death and Transfiguration.”  “Of Time and the City” is this director’s first documentary,  and it revisits some of the themes of those earlier autobiographical movies, in particular the pains and pleasures of growing up Roman Catholic and gay in postwar Britain.  The visual content of  “Of Time and the City” consists largely of archival clips of Liverpool from the 1940s to the ’60s, their nostalgic charm darkened by accompanying music and by the counterpoint of Mr. Davies’s dry, at times dyspeptic voice-over narration. His voice thickens with emotion as he recalls the delights of juvenile moviegoing or the ritual of a holiday trip to New Brighton, and hardens with contempt when he turns his gaze on the hoopla surrounding Queen Elizabeth’s coronation in 1953.  That lavish pageant — “the Betty Windsor show,” in Mr. Davies’s sarcastic formulation — took place at a time when many of Her Majesty’s subjects were still reeling from the trauma of war and economic hardship. “After farce, realism,” Mr. Davies says, as pomp on screen dissolves into pictures of poverty and desperation.  Realist though he may be, Mr. Davies is also a surpassingly lyrical filmmaker. Which is not to say  there is anything soft, sentimental or pretty about his sensibility. He may look backward with some fondness at the dowdy, workaday Liverpool of his childhood, and regard with horror the cheap, modernist housing projects that concentrated misery in the name of relieving it, but he hardly clings to a rosy view of the good old days. There was too much pain and longing, too much sexual and spiritual confusion, for any of that.  Nor does his profound love of his native city seduce him into civic boosterism. Liverpool’s 20th-century claim to fame rests on its mid-’60s contributions to popular music, but Mr. Davies is not a fan, preferring Bruckner to the Beatles and Mahler to the Merseybeat sound.  And while he professes an early and abiding love for the art form in which he works, his deepest cultural affinity seems to be with poetry. “Of Time and the City,” with its meditative tone and thematically (rather than chronologically) determined structure, might be classified as an essay film, but it is, even beyond that generic description, a stubbornly and thrillingly literary work.  Indeed, in spite of the care with which its pictures were assembled, the movie acknowledges — even insists upon — the limitations of the cinematic image.  Those fuzzy, faded scenes of mothers pushing prams, fathers heading off to work, shops and churches and factories are all in themselves ephemeral, trivial, mute. They are given eloquence partly by their juxtaposition in a collage, but even more by the words that accompany them. And while some of these belong to Mr. Davies himself, a great many are borrowed — from Sir Walter Raleigh and Percy Bysshe Shelley, in addition to Eliot and others. Or perhaps not borrowed, but claimed, as part of a birthright whose precise function is to draw out the common meaning of individual experience.  To rescue some fragments of the English poetic tradition from academic oblivion might not have been Mr. Davies’s principal intention in making “Of Time and the City.”  If it had been, the film would have been sour and didactic. Instead, it is a deeply personal piece of art that never descends into the confessional or the therapeutic, and a work of social and literary criticism that never lectures or hectors, but rather, with melancholy, tenderness and wit, manages to sing.

After a regrettable eight-year absence from filmmaking, Brit helmer Terence Davies returns with "Of Time and the City," a highly personal film essay about his hometown, Liverpool. A collage of archive material and original footage is fused with distinctive musical choices and a rhapsodic voiceover by Davies himself that cogitates on themes familiar from the helmer's work. Result is by turns moving, droll and charming, and niftily assembled, but not necessarily that profound. Outside Blighty, distribs may feel not quite enough time is spent in the city itself (pic runs 77 minutes) to justify theatrical runs, confining pic to fest and tube play.
Pic's structure is based neither on strictly chronological nor thematic criteria; rather, free association is the order of the day here, as images, music and voiceover narration work together to blend the macro and the microcosmic perspectives, laying personal memories side by side with, literally, a bird's eye view on the city. A same, associative principle that governed Davies' earlier feature work ("The Terence Davies Trilogy," "Distant Voices, Still Lives," "The Long Day Closes"), in which events seldom happen in order and instead seem to tumble out of a narrator's brimming mind, is at play here. Parallels could be invoked with other essayist-filmmakers, such as Patrick Keiller (whose "London" this picture recalls in its intellectual scope), Humphrey Jennings ("Listen to Britain") and Derek Jarman.
Take, for instance, the opening sequence, wherein shots of Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery in all its neo-classical, colonnaded splendor segue into images shot inside a Catholic church, while the voiceover contemplates returning to the past, quoting A.E. Housman's lines about a "land of lost content." Next, archive footage from the earliest days of cinema shows trains moving through lost streets as Davies intones Percy Bysshe Shelley's "Ozymandias," another elegy for a lost civilization. Much of the voiceover's poetry, incidentally, is not attributed and simply blends in with Davies' own ideas. (Perhaps viewing the film could form the foundation for a drinking game among literary scholars, prompting participants to take a swig every time they spot a quotation in the mix.)
In fact, "mix" is just the word for Davies' project: He layers sounds -- snatches of archive recordings and music, for example -- on top of each other, reminiscent of the way hip-hop producers and DJs mash up songs and samples. (Davies would probably hate this comparison, given his confession here to disliking pop music that came after the arrival of rock 'n' roll.) 
Other key sequences, which will seem comfortingly familiar to Davies fans, include hymns to the power of Hollywood cinema, the church that replaced the Church in helmer's heart, archive footage of working-class people performing quotidian rituals (shots of women washing windows evoke a crucial sequence in "Distant Voices, Still Lives"), and spectral voices from the past, variously snatches of radio programs like the camp 1960s radio show "Round the Horne," or of an anonymous woman recalling how she was made an orphan by the death of her mother and sailor father. 
Weaving in and out, Davies sketches in bits of his own autobiography and personal opinion. A memory of the annual exotic pomegranate he got in his Christmas stocking each year as a child holds the same weight as a deliciously mocking description of Queen Elizabeth II's wedding, described as the "The Betty Windsor Show." Irony is much to the fore, with images and sound abrading off one another, like when Peggy Lee's version of "The Folk Who Live on the Hill" backs a montage showing how the squalid Victorian terraces of the poor gave way to the squalid, 60s-built brutalist tower blocks of the poor.
The cumulative effect is very entrancing as it unspools, but once the lights go up some viewers may feel a little short-changed. For all the sensuousness of the experience, Davies doesn't really have that much to say specifically about the city of Liverpool itself, particularly in its present state as it undergoes, like many of Blighty's provincial metropolises, a profound shift from industrial to service-sector economics. The emphasis on the working-class culture of the past teeters at times on the banal. It's to the city's credit that its funding bodies and those of the region put money into the pic, despite these lacunae. 
All the same, praise is due for pic's polished sheen, from the standout musical choices, to the oneiric editing, to the helmer's rich, narrating baritone itself. The archive research, credited to Mike McKibben and Angela Byrne is worth the price of admission alone.

One of the major British filmmakers of his generation, Terence Davies  revisits his youth to decidedly mixed effect in Of Time and the City —a personal documentary evocation of post–World War II Liverpool. Davies, 64, is only a few years younger than the Beatles  and grew up in a similar, working-class Liverpudlian milieu, but, suffering acute Catholic guilt for his sexual orientation, recalls a wholly different history.
Narrating a choice assemblage of archival, amateur, and newsreel footage, the filmmaker adopts a mock plummy tone: Late in the movie, he calls Of Time and the City  his "chanson d'amour for all that has passed." Satirizing Liverpool 's grandiose aspirations, Davies dwells on his hometown's pretentious official architecture, including a once-imposing cathedral transformed into a fashionable restaurant. (The good old days were less vulgar—except when they weren't.)
After a number of movies based on family stories, Davies announced that his 1992 masterpiece The Long Day Closes  would be his final autobiographical film; not having made a movie since his terrific adaptation of Edith Wharton 's The House of Mirth  (2000), he hardly seems thrilled to be revisiting his hometown. Of Time and the City  communicates acute, if not bitter, ambivalence. Davies can't decide whether he wants to remember or forget the childhood ecstasy of attending Hollywood  musicals or the "dark desire" of his adolescent fascination with professional wrestlers.
The images of kids playing in brick lanes or family excursions to the seaside potently adumbrate 1950s Britain, and Of Time and the City  has, in general, been extremely well-received by British critics. Still, the filmmaker's incantatory, pompous delivery seems designed to create maximum distance from the material. Davies burdens his already overwrought chanson d'amour with not-always-credited bon mots from Yeats , Joyce, Engels, Chekhov, Jung, and Eliot. He has nothing but scorn for a royal coronation ("the start of the Betty Windsor Show"), and the ascension of the homeboy Fab Four is greeted with a sarcastic "yeah-yeah-yeah-yeah." Davies sonorously laments the decline of the "witty lyric and the well-crafted love song," and notes that he rejected pop for classical music—except when he doesn't.
Shots of miserable, misbegotten housing estates are accompanied by Peggy Lee 's rendition of the saccharine "The Folks Who Live on the Hill." Korean War footage is set to "He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother." Davies concludes another tour of failed urban development by citing "the British genius for making 'The Dismal' "—a national characteristic he immediately demonstrates with a lugubriously hummed version of Brahms 's Lullaby. No nostalgic "Penny Lane" or "Strawberry Fields" here. The filmmaker prefers an angrier form of sentimentality.
