 The O in “O’Horten” stands for Odd, which is something of a translinguistic pun. It is the first name of the main character, a train engineer on the Oslo-Bergen line whose retirement initiates what action there is in this restrained, bittersweet comedy. And Odd Horten, a pipe smoker of few words and regular habits played by Baard Owe, is, true to the English meaning of his perfectly ordinary Norwegian name, a somewhat eccentric fellow.  As is the movie devoted to him, written and directed by Bent Hamer, whose name also looks like a bit of Anglo-Nordic wordplay. A craftsman who favors slightly crooked tools, Mr. Hamer has come to specialize in movies about men with offbeat sensibilities and curious work situations. His 2003 feature, “Kitchen Stories,” examined a group of social scientists observing the domestic habits of bachelors in 1950s Sweden. It was followed two years later by the English-language “Factotum,” whose very title evokes odd jobs and whose hero, played by Matt Dillon, never lasted more than a day or two in any of them.  Odd Horten has more dedication and discipline than that, and he is rewarded with a silver-plated miniature locomotive after 40  years of service. A railway man to the end, he has never been in an airplane and causes some havoc when he visits a friend at the airport, where the rules and protocols are nothing like what he’s used to.  Horten’s adjustment to his new life is Mr. Hamer’s main theme, one he explores with a dry, unsentimental warmth. Here is a fellow who has spent most of his life ruled by a timetable and traveling in straight lines. What will happen when he is allowed to stray, to meander, to loaf?  The film answers the question in part by adhering to the rhythms of its hero’s newly aimless existence. It is less a single narrative journey than a series of excursions and wanderings, some of them down dead-end paths, others through neglected areas. Oslo and its environs have a stately, careworn look, and the omnipresent snow muffles even painful or intense emotions. Horten’s cool, quizzical stoicism seems like an apt response to this environment, which makes you think that maybe he isn’t so odd after all.  “O’Horten,” made up of meticulously constructed, deadpan scenes that turn on Keatonesque visual jokes, shows some affinity with other recent films of similar geographic provenance. The slightly anachronistic mood and décor, as if we had wandered into a neighborhood untouched since sometime in the middle of the 20th century, shows clear affinities with the work of Aki Kaurismaki of Finland, many of whose characters are more dissolute versions of Horten.  Mr. Hamer’s self-enclosed set pieces — Horten, stumbling into a strange apartment through the window, finds himself a prisoner in a young boy’s bedroom; Horten, stuck on a runway, lights up his pipe; Horten, in the passenger seat, survives what must be the gentlest fatal car accident in history — are like sweeter variations on the mordant visual jokes that are a specialty of the Swedish director Roy Andersson (“Songs  From the Second Floor,” “You, the Living”).  Other parallels come to mind: Jim Jarmusch without the relentless pursuit of cool; a more modest, less clowning Jacques Tati. But Mr. Hamer’s quiet, curious cinematic universe is its own special place. Not a lot happens there — a guy buys a pipe, or drinks a beer, or attempts a ski jump — but it is anything but dull. This is also a world of feelings that, however small or indirectly expressed, are authentic and recognizable. “O’Horten” is about frustration, patience, kindness and the wildness that lurks in even the calmest hearts.

Three years after his American project, the gritty Charles Bukowski adaptation "Factotum," Norwegian writer-helmer Bent Hamer's fifth feature, tragicomedy "O'Horten," returns to the domestic landscapes, offbeat humanism and stylistic quirks of his earlier work. Although the bittersweet, episodic tale of an ultra-dedicated locomotive engineer uneasily transitioning into retirement lacks the fully developed characters and tightly constructed narrative of his more poignant and substantial "Kitchen Stories," it nevertheless provides a warm and gently humorous divertissement that should be appreciated by niche arthouse auds worldwide.
More highly visual mood piece than sustained storytelling, low-key pic unfolds as series of atmospheric vignettes set in a winter landscape that contrast deadpan protag's routine working life with the absurdist situations he encounters when parted from the world of printed timetables and pre-ordained station stops. However, some episodes (such as prolonged, almost Jacques Tati-like section at the Oslo airport) seem to serve merely as a platform for Hamer's playful visual style rather than moving story forward.
At the age of 67, loner (but not lonely) Odd Horten (Bard Owe) is forced to step down from his engine-driving job. Opening visuals telegraph how railroad is his life; even his small apartment lies in the shadow of the tracks and is filled with the sound of passing trains.
In one of pic's drollest scenes, colleagues honor the dignified, pipe-smoking Horten at a retirement dinner featuring their unique take on toasts and party games. The framing of the sequence is a triumph of mise-en-scene, with action unfolding in unusual depth perspective, a Roy Andersson-like compositional device that Hamer effectively uses multiple times.
After a mishap causes Horten to miss his last scheduled run in the driver's seat, and a visit with his mother at her nursing home leaves him in an unsettled mood, a series of peculiar nighttime scenes play out with the logic of a bad dream. Still clad in his work clothes, he barely escapes making a bad decision about his beloved boat, loses his shoes after-hours at the gym and discovers that his longtime tobacconist has suddenly died. The chronology of these events is unclear, but they evoke the anxiety and lack of control Horten is experiencing about his new life.
Ultimately, an encounter with Trygve Sissener (Espen Skjonberg), an odd elderly gent with a cheerful "it's never too late" philosophy, inspires Horten to finally take off his uniform and open himself to things he never previously tried. Just-so ending is positive yet unsentimental.
Although liberally sprinkled with moments of delightful, surreal comedy, Hamer's loosely structured screenplay is also laden with melancholy. It offers some wry dialogue and wordplay, but an overlarge part seems given over to exposition to tie scenes together.
 On screen non-stop, Owe is Buster Keaton-like perfection --and unafraid to show his trim physique in a nude swimming scene. Likewise, production package (with exception of overly murky night scenes) is aces, with production design and score the outstanding tech credits.


The premise of this gentle existential farce from Norwegian director Bent Hamer  is little more than an excuse for a series of deadpan vignettes about love, death, and the meaning of life. Forced into age-mandated retirement, longtime train engineer Odd Horten  (Bård Owe ) quite literally goes off the rails and spends most of the movie dazedly wandering the wintry streets of Oslo , searching a maze-like airport for a prospective buyer for his boat, chatting up the recently widowed proprietress of a tobacco shop, and—in the film's loveliest sequence—riding shotgun with an avuncular old drunkard who prides himself on the ability to drive blindfolded. Above all, Horten—like his Seuss-ian near-namesake—seeks a sense of purpose. Hamer, whose Kitchen Stories  tipped its hat to Tati and whose Factotum  made an admirable stab at Charles Bukowski , here achieves a tone somewhere in the ballpark of Kaurismäki, with Owe's wonderfully stoic face rarely bending as it observes his fellow man in all his small-scale absurdities. The images, lit by the cameraman John Christian  Rosenlund, have the incandescent glow of storybook illustrations. The movie, on its own modest terms, satisfies greatly.
