 Correction Appended  It’s not easy to turn one of the most controversial events of the 20th century into a movie that makes your eyes roll, but “O Jerusalem” does this and worse. Shaping the founding of the State of Israel into a middle school history lesson — complete with textbook dialogue and strained neutrality — Elie Chouraqui’s clunking film would much rather bore than offend.  Based on a 1972 nonfiction book by Larry Collins and Dominique Lapierre, this movie views the conflict through the eyes of two American friends, a Jew (J. J. Feild) and an Arab (Saïd Taghmaoui). Touching on every bullet point — the 1946 bombing of the King David Hotel, the United Nations vote to divide Palestine the following year — the filmmakers struggle for fairness, and as a result most of the film’s ire is borne by the British, who appear as pompous and callous wardens all too happy to cut and run.  Carefully switching sides every few minutes, “O Jerusalem” quivers with choirs and soaring strings. Whether on a Middle Eastern battlefield or the streets of New York, characters converse in stilted, expository mouthfuls that smother emotion.  “We are 2,000 against a million,” Ian Holm, as David Ben Gurion, announces, fighting for dignity beneath a flurry of white hair. The tragedy of this film is that it’s difficult to care.    “O Jerusalem” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Characters are injured, and dialogue is butchered.
Retooling Larry Collins  and Dominique Lapierre 's sprawling 1972 docu-novel about the birth of Israel  around a sorely tested friendship between a Jew (J.J. Feild ) and an Arab (Saïd Taghmaoui ), this adorably clumsy melodrama has going for it a conciliatory spirit intended to warm the liberal heart. That's also a weakness, with director Elie Chouraqui  and co-writer Didier Lepecheur  falling prey to a fatal even-handedness that reduces a complex battle for the loveliest, most fought-over city in the world to a pile of heroic clichés. Though no one actually breaks into song, the cheesy battle scenes and even cheesier romantic backstory will have you waiting in vain for a musical. Politics pops its head in here and there, but it's hard to stay focused when Ian Holm , as Ben Gurion , keeps rushing around in electrocuted hair extensions, declaiming history. Imagine watching Otto Preminger 's equally silly 1960 Exodus  now and you'll have O Jerusalem  , minus Paul Newman 's blue-eyed wink.
