As irresistibly brash as its unwieldy title, Once in a Lifetime: The Extraordinary Story of the New York Cosmos  is the perfect tailgate party for Americans who may not care a dribble about the World Cup — but will after watching this infectiously energetic documentary. As much about the zeitgeist of riotous New York City in the 1970s as it is about the unlikely soccer team (led by the great Pelé) hustled together by outsize entrepreneurs, it's a stylish scramble of evocative footage, groovy music, and crazy-candid reminiscences from key players still proud to score.

 Giddy, gossipy and endearingly unslick, "Once in a Lifetime: The Extraordinary Story of the New York Cosmos" chronicles the  rise and fall of the most famous   soccer team in the United States with slapdash glee. Fielding heroes and villains, gentlemen and rogues, booze and women, it plays like the "Dynasty" of sports documentaries. There's even a little soccer.  Via newsreels and interviews (both winking and candid) we watch a ragtag team of part-time players move from a scrubby field that had to be spray-painted green before games to a 1977 North American Soccer League championship playoff in Giants Stadium in front of 77,691 fans. "I don't think any one of us ever felt entitled," says Shep Messing, a former player whose glorious sideburns and moody gaze once landed him a nude magazine spread. The moment is surprisingly moving, a micro-view of the film's perfect balance of heart and hedonism.  Crucial  to the team's success was the recruitment of an international roster of stars, led by the exuberant Pelé (coaxed out of retirement with the help of Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and untold millions) and Germany's smooth-as-silk Franz Beckenbauer. But the movie's central intrigue is the relationship between the team's millionaire founder, the Warner Communications chairman Steve Ross, and the volatile Italian striker Giorgio Chinaglia. "He was a malign influence," Clive Toye, the Cosmos' former general manager, says of Mr. Chinaglia, who smirks delightedly at the camera like an extra from "The Godfather." But this is a movie so unabashedly in love with its subject that  even audiences who don't know Giorgio Chinaglia from  Georgie Best will leave the theater grinning.  "Once in a Lifetime" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some strong language and cheesy male nudity.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

Fleet-footed docu "Once in a Lifetime" covers the remarkable story of the New York Cosmos, the Harlem Globetrotters of soccer back in the 1970s. Although the team's star player, Pele, declined to be interviewed, original material finds many of the Cosmos' major players and sideliners remembering the club's heyday. While soccer fans will rep the core aud, even non-fans can enjoy. Recently recruited by Miramax for theatrical Stateside, "Lifetime" could score even better abroad as a niche, and hit the back of the net on ancillary.
Well-researched docu goes back to the start of the 1970s, when late Warner Bros. mogul Steve Ross conceived a passion for a game played and loved by millions of people the world over, yet barely known by most Americans. Bringing in Warners-subsidiary Atlantic Records' guiding lights Ahmed and (now deceased) Nesuhi Ertegun for his braintrust, Ross set out to create a glamor team that would break the sport into the U.S. in 1971.
Early players such as Shep Messing and Werner Roth recall the team's dismal Randall's Island home field, and the tiny crowds.
All that changed when Pele -- Brazil's three-time World Cup star -- was signed for $5 million. Media interest, and attendance soared.
As the decade wore on, Ross went on a shopping trip, buying up such stars as German Franz Beckenbauer, Brazilian Carlos Alberto and Brit Rodney Marsh.
The hearty partying team members's tours became notorious for hedonism (sex on planes, etc.), and the Cosmos had a regular table at Studio 54.
Pic gets bogged down in who-said-what and dissed-whom details in its last third, and loses some narrative buoyancy.
Helmers also tone down in these later reels the use of '70s-style split screens that jazz up the pic's opening half and recall old credit montages from sports shows of the era. Although both helmers are Brits, pic feels more tailored to American rather than international viewers.
Soundtrack creates a distracting equivalent of patterned aural wallpaper with well-chosen vintage funk and groove tracks by the likes of Junior Walker and Parliament. Rest of the tech package just fine, reminiscent of upscale TV docs.
Helmer Paul Crowder explained during an onstage Q&A in Berlin that Pele wouldn't be interviewed because of his commitments to the more hagiographic recent docu "Pele Forever."
 Camera (color/B&W, HD-to-35mm), Nick Bennett; editor, Crowder; music, Matter; music supervisor, Liz Gallacher; sound (Dolby Digital), Matt Israel. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Berlinale Special), Feb. 13, 2006. Running time: 97 MIN.
 


 Narration:
 Matt Dillon.
 


 

For a brief, shining moment in the late 1970s, soccer was a hot ticket in America. At their peak, the New York Cosmos  drew 77,000 fans to Giants Stadium , and their aging but charismatic stars—Brazilian legend Pelé , Italian schemer Giorgio Chinaglia , unflappable German Franz Beckenbauer —were the toasts of the town, especially at Studio 54, which served as the team training room. This intermittently fascinating documentary chronicles the rise and fall of the Cosmos—which is also the rise and fall of U.S. soccer. The tragicomedy stars Cosmos owner Steve Ross  (then chairman of Warner Communications ) as the blinkered hero, Pelé as the faltering god, and Chinaglia as the dark-eyed villain. Will soccer ever make a comeback here? Not unless Americans decide to watch it on TV: Witnesses for the prosecution would like to blame Chinaglia, but ABC Sports ' dismal soccer ratings in 1979 spelled the doom of the Cosmos and the North American Soccer League  just five years later.
