 You don’t have to be a fan of African tunes to appreciate “On the Rumba River,” Jacques Sarasin’s heartfelt ode to Congolese music and its resilient practitioners.  Focusing primarily on Antoine Kolosoy, known as Wendo, the region’s brightest and most enduring star, this alternately poignant and playful documentary views his achievements from a context of political oppression and economic deprivation. Now 83, Mr. Kolosoy — a onetime riverboat mechanic and boxer whose first album was recorded in 1948 — is seen enjoying a reunion with former band mates while dodging his wife’s pleas to get a job.  “We got our independence, but all we do is kill each other,” he tells us while the camera tracks through the misery of the Kinshasa slums, their squalor a shocking counterpoint to the effervescence of the music. Whether proclaiming the indifference of politicians or the thrill of infatuation, the songs — heavily influenced by the music of Cuban seamen in the 1940s — offer a welcome distraction from poverty and civil war.  Filming in late 2004, the director uses his eyes but not his voice, allowing his subjects to guide the story. In the background, the vast expanse of the Congo River flows with a neglected beauty; the country may be falling into ruin, but the songs remain the same.

You've never heard of him, but Antoine Kolosoy , a/k/a Wendo, a/k/a Papa Wendo , is perhaps the most beloved musician that the Democratic Republic of Congo  (a/k/a Zaire, a/k/a Belgian Congo) has ever known. The peripatetic Wendo got his start as a teenager, traveling up and down the Congo River  as a mechanic, boxer, and part-time musician. He ascended to the ranks of the mono-named in 1948, when his first album became a massive hit and established him as the father of a new genre: Congolese Rumba. After 12 years of megastardom, though, the rise of the dictator Mobutu Sese Seko  in the '60s reduced Wendo to homelessness—until he was rediscovered in the '90s. With On the Rumba River , yachtsman-cum- documentarian Jacques Sarasin  has compiled a meditative ramble through the highlights of Wendo's career, told entirely through song and interviews with Wendo's musician-colleagues. As a filmmaker, Sarasin has an extraordinarily light touch—a good thing for those who want to sit back and enjoy the music (the toe-tappingly spirited rendition of Wendo's biggest hit, "Marie-Louise," is a highlight), a bad thing for viewers unfamiliar with Congolese history and in need of a little context with their rumba.
