 As the Statue of Liberty shimmers in the distance like a ghostly sentinel in "On the Outs," its image of promise seems to belong to a country apart from the mean streets of Jersey City, where the lives of three desperate teenage girls unravel. The docudrama,  which opens today in New York, is certainly not the first film  to show how a crushing urban environment can make a sensible-sounding antidrug slogan like "just say no" seem like so much nonsense, but it's one of the strongest.  For children raised in a neighborhood as blighted as the one in which these girls struggle to grow up, any promise of an escape from misery, be it from a fickle gangster's sweet talk or the temporary obliteration of a crack pipe, is better than nothing.  The movie, directed by Lori Silverbush and Michael Skolnik, is based on actual case studies of young women who spent time in the Jersey City juvenile detention center. Much of the dialogue was developed through group improvisation by an ensemble playing characters who seem as real as if they had been approached on the street by a cinematographer and told to go on being themselves.  The realism of their garbled, profanity-riddled language and of settings that include a crumbling outdoor crack den and an actual detention center makes any detail that doesn't seem exactly right look all the more artificial. The girls' rough physical confrontations often have the stagy feel of jerry-built  battles set up to illustrate the rising level of violence among urban teenage girls. The same, of course, could be said of  plot developments in many a John Cassavetes film. It isn't the tics of the plot but the raw human texture beneath that really matters.  The most innocent of the three girls, 15-year-old Suzette (Anny Mariano), lives with a strict, watchful mother, whose discipline can't compete with the call of the street. Once Suzette is approached by Terrell, a  crack dealer who seduces and impregnates her, then disappears, she is lost. She winds up in the detention center after Terrell shoots and kills a rival crack dealer (a gun-wielding child who's not even adolescent) and flees, leaving her clutching the bag holding his gun.  As the movie tracks Suzette's downfall, you can see the faint light in her startled eyes flicker out and her expression freeze into the suspicious glower of someone whose basic sense of trust has been forever betrayed.  A second strand of the plot follows the arrest and detention of Marisol (Paola Mendoza), the crack-addicted single mother of a little girl. At the detention center she discovers the hard rule of law; it will probably take years before she can regain custody of the child who is the focus of her life. Her hopes rest on the slim chance that she can get a job and stay off drugs. Learning the bad news, Marisol, whose mother is also a  drug addict, is seized with rending fits of grief, fury and frustration.  The pluckiest of the three, 17-year-old Oz (Judy Marte of "Raising Victor Vargas"), is a tough, tomboyish crack dealer and good-hearted caretaker of her asthmatic, mentally retarded younger brother, Chuey. In the movie's one joyful moment, she accompanies him on an excursion to an arcade in Times Square, where he finds himself in jingle-jangle heaven.  "On the Outs" offers no solutions and  no inspirational uplift beyond its ambiguous final image: a girl who has contemplated suicide but thought better of it gazes over New York harbor. She faces the future utterly alone but still alive.

Theatrical prospects are iffy, but "On the Outs" could leave an impression in fest and noncommercial venues. Gritty docu-style drama, co-directed by Lori Silverbush and Michael Skolnik from Silverbush's fact-inspired script, skillfully entwines stories of three young women drifting in and out of a Jersey City juvenile detention center. Fluid DV lensing and sometimes seamless, sometimes deliberately skittish editing intensify the overall feel of meticulously detailed verisimilitude. At-risk teens might profit from exposure to this cautionary pic.
Film serves as an attention-grabbing showcase for three promising actresses in sharply drawn lead roles. Oz (Judy Marte of "Raising Victor Vargas") is a hardboiled 17-year-old drug dealer who barks orders at her male underlings, beats any guy who gives her lip, yet maintains a soft spot in her heart for mentally challenged brother (Dominic Colon). Fifteen-year-old Suzette (Anny Mariano) falls for the neighborhood smoothie who impregnates her, then leaves her holding a murder weapon. Crack-addicted Marisol (Paola Mendoza) struggles to clean up her act so she can regain custody of her child, but old habits die hard. Affecting finale provides hint of better life for only one character.
Camera (color, DV), Mariana Sanchez de Antonano; editor, Martha Skolnik; music, Ricardo Leigh, Brian Satz; production designer, Katya Blumenberg. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Discovery), Sept. 12, 2004. Running time: 81 MIN.

 


In the Lower East Side coming-of-age tale Raising Victor Vargas , Judy Marte  played a distracted, traumatized girl whose pained silences could be perceived by neighborhood kids as a sign of haughtiness. Now as Oz, one of three young women we follow through a mean season in Jersey City , Marte rivets as a tomboy roughneck, a corner store thug with a drug addict mom and mentally challenged brother. Oz's story weaves through those of two other women whose paths she crosses in juvenile detention—the naive Suzette (Anny Mariano ), charmed and knocked up by a flossy but homeless local dealer who proceeds to get her into even more trouble, and Marisol (Paola Mendoza ), an addict–single mom whose absences result in her toddler being siphoned into Child Protective Services.
Like documentarian Liz Garbus , whose 2003 Girlhood  traces the lives of two girls in and out of lockdown, the filmmakers gathered real tales of woe. The lives of On the Outs ' characters, cobbled from the circumstances of girls in Jersey detention, sometimes feel like the composites they are. But despite some bit players who use occasions like a flophouse round of Russian roulette to pretend they're in a Damon Dash  flick, the central trio handles the narrative burdens well. Mendoza may overplay her tantrums and Mariano lay too far back, but they're ultimately sympathetic. Marte is the obvious star, of course, swinging effortlessly from cool compassion when Oz takes her adoring brother to play vids in Times Square  to the hard-skully sass and brawl of dead-end hustling. Most importantly, the environment feels real: the accents, the snaps, the working moms and warehouse crack nooks, every dilapidated stairwell, every bodega and lovingly appointed teenage bedroom sanctuary. Even frequent panning toward the Emerald City of Manhattan and the stark commentary of Lady Liberty throwing shade at Ocean Avenue blight don't seem excessive. After all, that's the view. On some days it looks like hope; on others, hypocrisy.
