         "Opal Dream" is an exceptional family film, arriving just in time for the Thanksgiving holiday. Directed with sensitivity by "The Full Monty's" Peter Cattaneo, it is the antithesis of the standard synthetic Hollywood family movie, which is all too often weighed down by ludicrously exaggerated special effects and stunts and glazed over by gross humor. Adapted by Cattaneo and others from Ben Rice's novel "Pobby and Dingan," "Opal Dream" is notable for deftly balancing life's harsher moments with its possibilities for hope.
 
  Pobby and Dingan, a boy and a girl, are the imaginary friends of blond, fragile-looking 9-year-old Kellyanne (Sapphire Boyce), who lives with her parents Rex (Vince Colosimo) and Annie (Jacqueline McKenzie) and 11-year-old brother Ashmol (Christian Byers)- he prefers to be called Ash- in an opal mining community in the Australian outback. They are an attractive and loving family, eager for Kellyanne to outgrow her imaginary pals but in the meantime deciding that the kindest, safest policy is to go along with her- especially in a remote community that can hardly be expected to have a child psychiatrist in its midst.
 


         






    The day does come when Pobby and Dingan do disappear from Kellyanne's imagination, but the impact upon her is not of liberation. To humor his distraught daughter, Rex goes searching for the two and inadvertently wanders onto another man's claim, causing him to be labeled a "ratter," accused of trespassing and prospecting. The community's shunning of her father not surprisingly has an adverse effect on Kellyanne.
 
  The way in which the family's predicament plays out is inspired and a testament to Cattaneo's skill in eliciting poignancy from developments that easily could have seemed overwhelmingly sentimental, not to mention improbable. Cattaneo is well-served by the strengths that he brought to "The Full Monty": a natural screen storytelling ability, a deep affection for a hardscrabble community, skill with actors and a healthy sense of humor. "Opal Dream" acquires dimension with the realization that there's a parallel with Rex's hopes for striking it rich and his daughter conjuring up a pair of friends. For U.S. audiences, the film's setting serves to enhance its credibility, for it is surely easier to believe that a certain degree of old-fashioned honesty and decency could still thrive in the Australian outback than in just about any place in America.
 
  MPAA rating: PG for mild thematic elements, language and some violence. Running time: 1 hour, 25 minutes. Exclusively at the Westside Pavilion, 10800 Pico Blvd., West L.A., (310) 281-8223; One Colorado, 42 Miller Alley, Pasadena, (626) 744-1244; and Regal/Edwards University Town Center 6, 4245 Campus Drive, Irvine, (949) 854-8818.   

 A warning to parents everywhere about the dangers of indulging irrational  behavior, “Opal Dream” is a sickly sweet tale of deep dysfunction masquerading as family solidarity.  In the Australian outback, in the opal mining community of Coober Pedy, Rex Williamson (Vince Colosimo) hunts maniacally for the perfect stone while his family endures a life of dust and deprivation. Proving that obsession flows downhill, Rex’s 9-year old daughter, Kellyanne (Sapphire Boyce), talks incessantly to a pair of invisible friends, insisting that they be fed and acknowledged as part of the family.  Instead of packing her off to therapy, Rex concocts an elaborate plan to “lose” the annoying pals. But  it backfires, and  he is left with a terminally grieving daughter and a charge of poaching another miner’s claim. Therapy would have been so much easier.  Adopting a tone of whimsy and treacle, the director, Peter Cattaneo — whose blue-collar strippers in “The Full Monty” had fancies of their own — fills the screen with lollipops and cute children’s drawings, while Robert Humphreys’s cinematography bleaches the already lunar landscape to a uniform pallor.  But as the film’s sentiment congeals in a mock funeral, with the entire town enabling Kellyanne’s disorder, the ghost of a real movie flits across the screen —  one capable of acknowledging that Kellyanne’s invisible friends are no different from the invisible opals dancing in her dad’s head.  “Opal Dream” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has mild violence and language, and a dangerous amount of sugar.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

From the first frames, when lollypops are offered to the camera, there's no escaping the saccharine miasma of whimsy enveloping Peter Cattaneo's "Opal Dream." Based on an acclaimed novella first published in Grantamagazine, the pic jettisons the story's adult flavor for a strictly cotton candy diet, investing its nine-year-old protag with a cutesy fantasy life that in the real world would be grounds for therapy. Moderate moppet biz can be expected for Focus Features, who bought Stateside rights, though parents may get a tummy ache.
Story is set in the South Australian opal mining community of Coober Pedy, where the Williamson family struggles to make ends meet while dad Rex (Vince Colosimo) pursues his dream of striking it rich underground. Mom Annie (Jacqueline McKenzie) works the supermarket counter, only rarely allowing her doubts about outback life to cloud her day.
While son Ashmol (Christian Byers) seems like a well-adjusted kid, little Kellyanne (Sapphire Boyce) is a social misfit who's constructed an inner life inhabited by two imaginary friends, Pobby and Dingan. She's first seen playing patty-cake, clapping the air with one or the other (thankfully, Cattaneo chose to keep them invisible).
The family is getting tired of Kellyanne's obsession, but weaning her off Pobby and Dingan proves impossible. Dad has the bright idea of claiming to take the two off with him one day into the mines, but when he returns without them Kellyanne throws a tantrum and insists he return at night to search for them.
Quicker than you can say "enabler," off he goes, but when Rex ventures too close to a rival miner's property, he's accused of trying to steal someone else's opals. Kellyanne doesn't give a fig for her Dad's problems, she just wants her friends back, and while Dad is made a target of the vicious miners' wrath, she slowly wastes away in bed.
Any shrink would label the family dysfunctional and Kellyanne psychotic, but Cattaneo instead presents her behavior as a charming byproduct of an over-productive imagination. Time and again, the little girl manipulates those around her into buying into her fantasy, sending a message to child viewers that parents will certainly not want reinforced in their own homes.
While Colosimo ("Lantana") and McKenzie do their best to make the characters three-dimensional, Boyce is a major drawback. Both child actors are newcomers to the screen. Byers is surprisingly strong and gives his role real weight, but Boyce remains limp throughout, her sickbed scenes recalling a kiddie production of "Camille."
The infectious smiles and foot-tapping soundtrack of Cattaneo's runaway hit "The Full Monty" are nowhere to be found. Where the "Pobby and Dingan" novella was much praised for its richly evoked landscape, Cattaneo and d.p. Robert Humphreys fail to make the eerie, semi-lunar terrain an ever-present character. Sound is occasionally positioned too far forward, and music, while generally avoiding violin swells, manages to make plucked guitars equally schmaltzy.
 Camera (color), Robert Humphreys; editor, Jim Clark; music, Christian Henson, Dario Marianelli; production designer, Elizabeth Mary Moore; art director, Nell Hanson; costume designer, Ruth de la Lande; sound (Dolby Digital), Toivo Lember, Robert Farr, Nick Foley; line producer, Elisa Argenzio; associate producers, Kate Myers, Michael Solinger; assistant director, Brendan Campbell; casting, Nikki Barrett. Reviewed at Rotterdam Film Festival (Time & Tide), Jan. 29, 2006 (Also in Berlin Film Festival -- Kinderfilmfest.) Running time: 85 MIN.
 


 With:
 Peter Callan, Robert Menzies, Adam Morgan, Rusty Potter, Denise Roberts.
 


 

Rush screaming from anything that announces itself as "a movie for children and grown-ups of all ages." Slight and shamelessly saccharine, Opal Dream  is devoted to the proposition that it takes an Australian-outback village to validate the imaginary friends of a blond child who is too sensitive for this world but not, alas, for this sappy movie. Adapted from what I suspect is a much better children's novel by Ben Rice , the story turns on eight-year-old Kellyanne (Sapphire Boyce ), an arty type who takes after her precious-stone-prospecting dad (Vince Colosimo ) and does the pale-and-consumptive thing when her ethereal buddies Pobby and Dingan disappear. Everything goes wrong, until suddenly everything goes right when Kellyanne's practical brother, Ashmol (Christian Byers), and their long-suffering mum (Jacqueline McKenzie ) rustle up all the crusty salt-of-the-earth types in their dusty village to bond in sympathy for the vanishing dreams of children large and small. Awkwardly directed by Peter Cattaneo , who also made The Full Monty , Opal Dream  is burdened with lashings of that movie's schmaltz, but none of its raucous comedy. Pardon my disbelief, but even G-rated tots will roll their worldly little eyes.
