n actress with Bette Davis eyes may never win the Miss Universe title. But if those eyes belong to significant talent, their magnetic field can attract Oscar nominations and film festival awards beyond the grasp of any shrink-wrapped beauty contestant. The wonderful Brazilian actress Fernanda Montenegro, familiar to us from "Central Station," has only to widen her soulful brown eyes to suggest a sorrowful kindhearted South American answer to Giulietta Masina. Ms. Montenegro's rough-hewn integrity is the one quality that ennobles "The Other Side of the Street," an otherwise confused mixture of cat-and-mouse thriller and sentimental old folks' love story that is well below the level of "Central Station." The movie's scenario suggests "Rear Window" as it might have been rejiggered for another bright-eyed Davis spinoff, Angela Lansbury playing everyone's favorite snoop, Jessica Fletcher. Regina, Ms. Montenegro's character, is a Jessica-like busybody with a scolding air. Divorced, with a son she rarely sees, she devotes much of her endless spare time to "senior service," as a volunteer watchdog on the lookout for crime in the Copacabana neighborhood of Rio de Janeiro. All fired up by the breakup of a child-prostitution ring based on one of her tips, Regina spends hours each night scouring the windows of the building across the way through binoculars. When she witnesses a man's possible murder of his wife by lethal injection, she is certain she has struck criminal gold and notifies the police. But the suspect, Camargo (Raul Cortez), a judge, is not arrested. Outraged, Regina decides to play sleuth. The movie noisily shifts gears once Camargo notices Regina and asks her out. Without confessing that she was the spy who summoned the law to his apartment, she eventually hears his version of events surrounding the death of his wife, who had cancer. A romance develops, and the intense love scenes between Ms. Montenegro and Mr. Cortez, both over 70, are the movie's strongest moments; it is virtually unheard of to find two actors of such advanced age generating such screen heat. "The Other Side of the Street" is the directorial debut of Marcos Bernstein, a co-writer of "Central Station." He fails to pull this movie's strands into a suspenseful thriller or an autumnal love story whose sunset colors linger in the mind.

Suspicious minds and autumnal romance cross paths effectively in "The Other Side of the Street," a diverting, if unspectacular, Brazilian drama centered on an aging female detective. Two-time Walter Salles scripter Marcos Bernstein ("Foreign Land," "Central Station") makes his helming bow with this extended character study, maintaining a sweet atmosphere blended with intrigue and an effortless segue between crime and romance. Skewed toward older audiences, pic should have no trouble traveling to fests, but may be too uneventful for significant earnings when released worldwide in May.
Fernanda Montenegro is Regina, a 65-year-old woman who surreptitiously works as a volunteer informant for Copacabana's police force. Though she has an excellent track record busting thieves and pimps, she hits a wall when, from her "Rear Window" vantagepoint, she espies an aging judge (Raul Cortez) apparently killing his wife with a lethal injection. Stymied by the police, she continues to investigate, and in the process the judge falls for her. As the mature snoop, Montenegro is constantly engaging; but while her dry delivery enhances the perceptive nature of Bernstein's dialogue, she can't transcend the script's low-key aspirations. Technically, film is excellent.
Camera (color), Toca Seabra; editor, Marcleo Moraes; music, Guilherme Bernstein Seixas; art director, Bia Junqueria; costume designer, Cristina Kangussu. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama), Feb. 12, 2004. Running time: 97 MIN.
 


Here are two mid-career Seijun Suzuki  opuses that didn't get him in trouble, but should have—the man's timeless disgust with formula and studio prescription radiates like desert heat from his movies, whose narratives are really just cheap suits endured on the wacky path to self-destruction. Fighting Elegy (1966) is as iconic as its title, a jumpy cartoon vision of 1930s Japanese youth culture driven into paroxysms of crazy, militaristic violence by its own sexual frustration. Often as broad as a Keystone two-reeler, the movie is virtually a mission statement by its apostatic director, and was the last Nikkatsu Studio film he made before being fired for Branded to Kill . Youth of the Beast  (1963), at any rate, should've given the company men a hint. Another reimagining of Red Harvest , the film posits Suzuki axiom Jo Shishido  as a dyspeptic, chipmunk-faced thug pitting one yakuza organization against another, but the resulting meth-cranked circus of jazzy chiaroscuro design and cartwheeling sadism has to be seen to be believed. With an essay by Howard Hampton  that's almost as much outrageous fun as the movie itself.


Also worth considering:
Heat  (Warner) Michael Mann 's perfect example of Los Angeles playing itself, finally in a special edition with deleted scenes, a Mann commentary, and, of course, an analysis of the De Niro-Pacino summit.
