
"P2" may sound a lot like a mountain. But it's actually the floor of a Park Avenue garage where young Angela (Rachel Nichols) has left her BMW for the day. It's Christmas Eve, and just before she can drive to her sister's, the car won't start. Now it seems she'll have to spend the night alone, running from Thomas (Wes Bentley) the psychotic security attendant on the graveyard shift.
Of course, she'll first have to remove the handcuffs and sit in the passenger seat while the attendant runs her co-worker into a wall again and again. No, "P2" is not a mountain. Quite the opposite: It's a 90-minute dip in some filmmakers' frightless cesspool (it took three men to whip up this torture fantasy). The movie peddles the timeless cliché of the imperiled chick shivering in wet clothes. When Angela tries to flee in an elevator, wearing a white evening dress, Thomas uses a fire hose to flood it. She's never dry again.
Another movie would have developed a psychological hook. "P2" illogically tacks one on: I see you all the time, and you totally ignore me. Now I have to torture you. Why? Duh. Because I love you. Oh, and don't try to humanize me by repeating my name, Angela. I'm a monster. Boooo. See? Why are you running away? Now I'll have to sic my Rottweiler on you. Would you like to see my Elvis impersonation? It's really wicked. While you bash out all the security cameras, I'm gonna swivel my hips to "Blue Christmas." Thank you. Thank you very much.
Amid the dumbness and disgust for paying customers, the movie does manage to cough up something I didn't expect: a performance so terrible you can't quite believe it's happening: Bentley's. He was the cute neighbor from "American Beauty" (the one who gave the plastic-bag speech, remember?). Here he plays the least convincing nutjob perhaps ever. When Thomas gets keyed up he screams like a man who's been stabbed in the back with a fork, which for some reason he fails to do when he's actually stabbed in the back with a fork. The night I saw it, that uncomfortableness of the laughter you sometimes get with a thriller was gone: The audience enjoyed laughing at him.


 Swift and stealthy “P2” is a canny exploitation of one of the urban woman’s  greatest fears: the after-hours parking garage. Throw in a car that won’t start, a creepy security guard and a filmmaking team with perfect synchronicity, and the result is a minimalist nightmare.  It’s Christmas Eve, and Angela Bridges (Rachel Nichols), a workaholic lawyer with a cool demeanor and a hot body, is dismayed to find herself trapped in her deserted office building. Her mood doesn’t improve when she’s attacked and sedated and wakes up tied to a chair wearing a cleavage-baring frock and blood-red lipstick. Seated opposite is Thomas (Wes Bentley), the smiling security guard who only wants to share his Christmas dinner and love of Hemingway — a predilection guaranteed to make any thinking woman run for the hills.  The debut feature of Franck Khalfoun (who wrote the screenplay with Alexandre Aja and Grégory Levasseur), “P2” is bloody but not punishingly so, limiting the gore to tightly edited set pieces that never linger. Having previously collaborated on “High Tension,”  the filmmakers work with smooth compatibility to extract maximum threat from their cavernous location. Prowling from one vacant level to the next, the camera sweeps over damp concrete and misshapen shadows while Elvis and Eartha Kitt warble seasonally on the soundtrack. Taking the bus to work suddenly seems like a very good idea.  “P2” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Characters are beaten, bitten, blinded and squished.

What "Psycho" did for the shower, "P2" tries very hard to do for the parking garage, spending most of its time below ground, and below an adequate level of convincing dread. Theatrical release will be merely a prelude to likely DVD success, at least among the hardcore, although the mix is too thin to intoxicate any but those most susceptible to gore, psychoses and the inherent terrors of the corporate office building. 
That's where Angela (Rachel Nichols), a harried executive, finds herself on Christmas Eve, and if there's a truism in American movies, it's this: Don't be the last to leave the building before a holiday. Only bad things can happen.
For Angela, they happen in the form of Thomas (Wes Bentley), the good-looking but crazy-as-a-half-starved-rat-in-a-coffee-can parking attendant, whom Angela has never seen before, but who has been watching her on the security cameras for months. Part of Angela's problem, presumably, is that she takes mass transit and has no idea what kinds of maniacs are parking her co-workers' Volvos.
What "P2" proves is that, given the right lighting, music and camera moves, your own living room could become a chamber of horrors. The parking garage is, by definition, claustrophobic, so helmer Franck Khalfoun has an edge here, but there's nothing intrinsically horrible about 'P2." Essentially a two-character melodrama, it depends for effect largely on the performances, which, while fine individually, together are a mismatch.
Nichols is in territory well trod over the years by everyone from Fay Wray and Grace Kelly to Heather Lagenkamp, the terrified but gutsy heroine, who in this case has been chloroformed and put into a sheer white evening dress by her abductor -- who must have anticipated that his captive would try to escape in an elevator, which he could then fill with water. (Nichols' considerable physical attributes, henceforth, seem to occupy most of the screen.) She's sympathetic, hysterical when required and likeable.
Bentley is off somewhere else entirely. Channeling Norman Bates by way of his own misfit character in "American Beauty," thesp plays Thomas for laughs often enough that one suspects he simply had no choice. The way Thomas is written, he's not evil -- twisted, sick and probably bipolar, yes, but we can't hate him.
He's so divorced from anyone's idea of reality that one can really only pity him, even when he commits the movie's single, utterly gratuitous act of vehicular violence. He's the kind of misfit you'd expect to have an Elvis obsession, which he does. All he needs is a copy of "The Catcher in the Rye" to make him a total cliche.
"P2" struggles to maintain its momentum because there's simply not enough to do in a parking garage to fill out a feature film; you might say the script contains a lot of available space. This is arguably symptomatic of the ailing horror genre, that filmmakers will go to such depths to find novel ways to terrify, maim and mutilate.
Production values are adequate.

After being KO'd in the underground parking garage of her Manhattan office building, Angela (Rachel Nichols ), a workaholic executive, wakes to find herself chained to a table. It's Christmas Eve, the building's empty, and a sad-eyed security guard named Thomas (Wes Bentley ) wants a little company. Angela quickly makes her escape, only to find herself trapped in the multi-level parking garage, with her suddenly angry lothario in hot pursuit. If it weren't for two excessively violent deaths, P2  could be termed a refreshingly old-fashioned thriller, one dependent on hairbreadth escapes and the pluck of its heroine. Take out those unnecessary moments of gore and you'd have a silly (can't Angela just pull the fire alarm?) but diverting little movie, one driven by a commanding performance from Nichols, a pale beauty whose resemblance to a young Sissy Spacek  has been playfully accentuated by blood streaks and a Carrie-like cream dress. Regrettably, writer-director Franck Khalfoun  (who wrote the script with High Tension  director Alexandre Aja ) appears to have neglected Bentley. The actor, who got his break as the son in American Beauty , doesn't appear to have been told that a good cat-and-mouse thriller needs a villain who whispers menacingly, not one who stomps his foot and shouts hysterically.
