Each year, a handful of movies are hailed as ''daring'' and ''edgy'' and ''subversive'' and a great many other things that turn out, almost invariably, not to be true. Then there's Todd Solondz's Palindromes , which is that rare event: a memorable provocation. Solondz, the naughty-boy poet-joker of desire and despair who made Welcome to the Dollhouse , Happiness , and Storytelling , is peerless at inventing new and visionary ways to get under your skin. Palindromes , at its simplest, tells the story of Aviva, a morose 13-year-old Jewish girl from New Jersey who gets herself pregnant, is forced by her mother to have an abortion, and ends up running away to a heartland America of wonders and terrors even more disquieting than the suburban enclave she left behind. Describing what happens in Palindromes , however, doesn't begin to capture what it's like to watch — the disturbed and heightened curiosity, the feeling of a social odyssey that unfolds with the suspense of a demented screwball dream. Think Welcome to the Dollhouse  meets The Night of the Hunter  meets Huck Finn in Wonderland . Solondz, who seems to have entered his avant-garde outlaw phase, has made a movie that demands to be seen because it's like nothing you've seen before.
Aviva, the glum, passive, slackly depressed heroine, is played, in succession, by eight different performers: four teenage girls, an androgynous boy, a 6-year-old girl, a hugely overweight African-American woman, and Jennifer Jason Leigh. If that sounds like a stunt, it is, but it's one that achieves a surprisingly direct emotional eloquence. Aviva, who is miserable about everything except her desire to have a baby, keeps her eyes down and speaks in a sodden hushed monotone just this side of disaffected. Her mutating look has the paradoxical effect of forcing us to focus on her innermost qualities, her identity, which gets handed from actor to actor, almost as if it were a ghost passing through different bodies. We're wired into Aviva's spirit, yet we're kept deeply aware of how fragile it is. The snuffing of identity, it turns out, is the theme of the movie.
Early on, Aviva offers herself, without pleasure, to the horny young son of her parents' friends. She wants to get pregnant, and does. For her mother, played with a queasy mixture of devotion and insensitivity by Ellen Barkin, the course is clear: Aviva must get an abortion. Many in the audience may think that's the wise choice as well, but this overly rote parental decision has a ghastly outcome, creating a potent unease.
Is Solondz making a pro-life statement? Yes, but not the one that you think. On the road, Aviva connects with Earl (Stephen Adly Guirgis), a trucker with a guilty taste for young girls, and she lands at the homestead of Mama Sunshine (Debra Monk), the relentlessly upbeat Christian matriarch of a family of wayward adoptees. A devout antiabortionist, with a husband whose feelings on the subject are even more extreme, Mama Sunshine regards herself as a holy savior of children. Many of her kids have disabilities (there's a girl with no legs), and when we see them perform the catchy-creepy teen-pop number ''This Is the Way (That Jesus Made Us),'' the layers of irony are head-spinning. Solondz flirts with creating a youth version of Freaks, except that he treats these kids without a trace of mockery, letting any exploitation reside in the eye of the beholder. Mama Sunshine clearly loves the children, yet she comes off as a subtly domineering cult leader who has made them over with a wholesome conformity that renders them mere reflections of her ''goodness.'' It's no wonder that Aviva, played in this sequence by the marvelous Sharon Wilkins, feels saved and lost at the same time.
In Solondz's surreal image of the red state/blue state mash-up, Aviva's mother embraces the right to abortion, yet she fails to grasp its spiritual toll. Mama Sunshine prizes ''life'' but not the idiosyncrasies of the lives she rescues. So who's really pro-life? In Palindromes , no one is — at least, not fully. That leaves a girl like Aviva floating in the winds, swatted around by an America that's caught between dueling visions of cut-rate humanity. (On the film's terms, she's a palindrome, the same forward and backward — which is to say, her identity isn't developed enough to change.)
I do wish that Solondz hadn't piled the theme of pedophilia onto his thicket of who-will- redeem-the-children mythology. Earl the trucker, a killer as well as a sexual predator, digs himself deeper into hell even as he tries to cleanse himself of sin (in a mournfully funny moment, he wails, ''How many times can I be born again?!''). He works up a gritty sympathy, but when Mark Wiener (Matthew Faber), from Welcome to the Dollhouse , shows up at a party to defend himself against charges of child molestation, we wonder what the scene is doing there. Palindromes  isn't flawless, yet it's an experience to love, to hate, to fight with and to meld your mind with.

alindromes" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from A. O. Scott's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 15, 2004. This unrated film opens today in Manhattan at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village, and in Los Angeles on Friday. "Palindromes," the latest film by Todd Solondz, is dedicated to the memory of Dawn Wiener, the unhappy young protagonist of his second feature, "Welcome to the Dollhouse." A sequel of sorts, the new movie begins at Dawn's funeral and follows the appalling adventures of her 13-year-old cousin, Aviva, for whom the dead girl serves as both inspiration and cautionary tale. In the first of this movie's short chapters, each named for a character, Aviva, a secular Jew from the New Jersey suburbs, is portrayed by an African-American girl, one of eight actresses to play the role. As Aviva makes her way, Candide-like, through a sordid world of sexual violence and cultural antagonism, her appearance changes - from black to white, fat to thin, brunette to redhead and, at one point, to that of Jennifer Jason Leigh. The effect is to keep you off balance and at a remove. That is not such a bad thing, because you will want to be as far away as possible. I say this with a heavy heart, since I have long admired Mr. Solondz for his honesty, his guts and his willingness to sniff out the few remaining taboos in modern American life and turn them into sick jokes. Some critics will no doubt say that he has gone too far this time, that rape, child molestation, abortion and the killing of doctors who perform abortions are not fit topics for his unsettling blend of mockery and melodrama. The real problem, it seems to me, is not that Mr. Solondz goes too far, but that he seems to have no particular direction in mind, no artistic interest beyond the limitless ugliness of humanity. Lurking in this ghastly tale of Aviva's intentional pregnancy, her unwanted abortion and her temporary adoption by a family of evangelical Christians are some provocative ideas about motherhood and the fragmentation of American moral life. But the expression of these ideas radiates a sour contempt for every human connection and emotion. Aviva's mother (Ellen Barkin) is a loving suburban mom who is also a simpering hysteric whose tears are mocked without pity. Aviva's grim adventures are a form of revenge on her mother, enacted less by the daughter than by the filmmaker. The human landscape of "Palindromes" is a vista of grotesqueness, dishonesty and creepiness. These are qualities Mr. Solondz has explored before, but this time he fails to make them interesting, partly because he lets himself and the audience off the hook.  

Todd Solondz returns to the emotional minefield of pre-adolescence in "Palindromes." At its best in the pungent opening stretch while gouging out the morally ambiguous behavior beneath the suburban family facade, the film paradoxically loses momentum when its teen runaway hits the road. But like the symmetrical word that supplies its title, the mordant comedy-drama recovers ground to become a boldly intriguing if not entirely satisfying subversion of American family values. Given the unblinking treatment of underage sex, distribs are likely to tread carefully, indicating a claim on the same specialty margins as Solondz's last feature, "Storytelling."
Scaled back from its original template as a trilogy of stories into a two-parter, that 2001 release felt compromised and incomplete. More rounded yet still somewhat insubstantial, "Palindromes" forgoes the accusatory bitterness to return to the droll pessimism tinged with tenderness of "Welcome to the Dollhouse." With four films under his belt -- not counting his little-seen first feature -- Solondz stands alone in his ability to mix caricature with serious intent in chronicling the desperation of solitude and the awkward search for love.
His most ambitious film both thematically and structurally, "Happiness" now appears like a momentary tangent rather than a determined career-growth step onto a broader canvas. Almost in defiance of critics, the bleak bard of New Jersey seems to defend his outsider status by making intimate provocations small enough in scale to inhabit the industry fringes even of the indie sector.
The most widely discussed device here will be the choice to have 12-year-old protagonist Aviva played by eight different actors -- two adults, four teenage girls, one pre-teen boy and a 6-year-old girl. The intention is not 100% clear either while watching the movie or after reading Solondz's statement about experimenting with an audience's ability to sympathize by casting different types as the same character. But the result is undeniably interesting and adds dimension to a story with a narrow gaze.
Using the funeral of "Dollhouse" misfit Dawn Wiener as a cruelly hilarious jumping off point, story shifts to sweet child Aviva (Emani Sledge) looking to her mother Joyce (Ellen Barkin) for reassurance that she won't end up like her suicidal cousin. Some years later, Aviva (Valerie Shusterov) expresses her desire to have a baby to Judah (Robert Agri), the lumpen, wannabe filmmaker son of family friends, who promptly rolls on top of her for perfunctory sex. Soon after, her horrified mother and father (Richard Masur) learn that Aviva (Hannah Freiman) is pregnant.
The battle between the single-minded girl determined to keep her baby, and her parents, set on quietly eliminating the problem, represents the movie's high point and the terrain on which Solondz's darts have their most morbid accuracy. Befuddled and well-meaning yet grimly unyielding, Barkin is terrific in the scenes in which she talks Aviva around to her way of thinking.
Inadvertently aided by cousin Mark Wiener (Matthew Faber, repeating his role from "Dollhouse"), Aviva (Rachel Corr) runs away following the abortion. Unaware of a hitch in the procedure that, as the story progresses, becomes its most savage irony, she assumes the name Henrietta that would have been her baby's.
She hooks up briefly with truck driver Joe (Stephen Adly Guirgis) for more dismal sex before landing -- this time transformed into a large black woman (Sharon Wilkins) -- in the home of Christian crusader Mama Sunshine (Debra Monk).
This protracted interlude all but halts the action and, while there's some ghastly amusement provided by Mama's funky Gospel-singing band of born-again disabled kids, the extreme religious right seems like too easy a mark for Solondz. It does serve, however, to illustrate the director's point that families can kill in a variety of ways.
Final section recounting the runaway's return home is invigorated by a brief, bruised turn from Jennifer Jason Leigh, putting her own penetrating stamp on Aviva.
Completing the circle that connects back to "Dollhouse," Aviva insists on inviting Mark to her homecoming barbecue despite his being stigmatized by the family after unproven charges of child molesting filed by sister Missy. Mark's view of life as an inflexible mathematical equation neatly summarizes Solondz's palindromic take on unbreakable patterns and people's resistance to change.
Not by any means a movie about teen pregnancy, abortion or sex with minors even though those issues arise, "Palindromes" instead uses a sad, wafer-thin tale of early adolescent longing to look at the dysfunction in American society. As such, the film will divide audiences between those who embrace or dismiss Solondz's barbed view and his method of presentation.
The cast's standout element, Barkin embodies countless levels of hypocrisy while maintaining the appearance of a good-natured woman, and the film slumps when she disappears for a long spell. Both singularly and cumulatively, the various Avivas all have touching moments. Most notably, Wilkins' awkward physicality and unguarded expression lend pathos, while Freiman handles the tough scenes of being strong-armed into an abortion with fragile intensity.
Divided by pastel-colored title cards -- pink for girls, blue for boys -- bearing characters' names, the film lacks the visual sharpness of Solondz's earlier work despite occasional moments of poetic beauty. Former Shudder to Think musician Nathan Larson's kitschy tinklings and singsong lullaby theme contribute to the dark mix of childhood innocence with harsh experience.

Somewhere over the rainbow and some-place beyond sarcasm lies the arid, forbidding world of Todd Solondz . Actually, "world" is a misnomer. Solondz-land, usually suburban New Jersey, is more like a nonexistent comfort zone. Palindromes , which opens with a Jewish prayer for the dead, is consecrated "in loving memory of Dawn Wiener ," the hapless heroine of Solondz's 1995 Welcome to the Dollhouse  and perhaps his alter ego; it concerns the misadventures of Dawn's 13-year-old cousin Aviva, who is played by eight performers of varying ages, races, genders, and body types (including, at one point, Jennifer Jason Leigh ). Dawn committed suicide but Aviva (Hebrew for "springtime," as well as a palindrome) wants to live—indeed, she wants to quicken with life and takes it upon herself to have hasty, furtive, and hardly enjoyable sex with the lumpish son of family friends in order to become pregnant. Which she does.
Directed in a functional style at a lugubrious pace, Palindromes  has a sedated quality that's deliberately at odds with its often sensationalistic material but perfectly suited to its schematics. Solondz recently told The  Austin Chronicle   that he considered Palindromes  "the heartbreaking story of a young girl on a quest for love." "Heartbreaking" is an abstract concept, as is love: The elephant in this dollhouse is the abortion that Aviva is compelled to have by her concerned mother (played as a comic horror by Ellen Barkin ) and that, against all odds, the doctor is compelled to botch.
The moral equation is further complicated once Aviva flees the safety of New Jersey for deepest America and, now played by a heavyset stricken-looking adult African American actress (Sharon Wilkins ), finds a temporary sanctuary in a ma-and-pa Christian commune for disabled or otherwise damaged children. In a movie populated by grim and unlovely people, cheerful Mama Sunshine  (Debra Monk ) is by default the most sympathetic character, even if she does feed her charges "freedom toast" for breakfast and encourage the group singing of inspirational rock-gospel anthems like "Every Child Has a Right to Be Born." The corollary turns out to be that every abortionist deserves to die—and then some.
All families are nightmarish, every mother is a hypocrite: Is Solondz a moralist or a misanthrope, or both? Does he hold his characters or his audience in greater contempt? The first half of Storytelling , Solondz's strongest filmmaking to date,  was a comedy of American racism far meaner, funnier, and more viewer-implicating than the warmed-over nasty name-calling of Neil LaBute 's new play This Is How It Goes. And having watched Palindromes  with an audience, I know that Solondz is cruelly adept at encouraging people—most of whom, I'd guess, were liberals—to laugh at death, even that of a child. On the other hand, it would be fun to view Palindromes  in the company of Mama Sunshine's crowd. Some might miss Solondz's film-nerd joke of underscoring the action with a pastiche of the breathy music from Rosemary's Baby ; it would be harder to ignore that Aviva (unfairly labeled a "child whore") has a sense of sex and procreation that, save for the protection of matrimony, is virtually identical to that of the Christian right.
Premiered during the 2004 presidential campaign, Palindromes suggests a nation fighting its second (or perhaps third) civil war. And like John Waters 's A Dirty Shame , Bill Condon 's Kinsey , and (mutatis mutandis) Mike Leigh 's Vera Drake , it conceptualizes the blue and red states of mind in terms of sexual autonomy. But unlike these other filmmakers, Solondz is not a humanist. Leigh's backstreet abortionist can be read as martyred saint or innocent monster; Solondz's characters are essentially static. This is the spelled-out meaning of his title: Late in the movie, Dawn's mathematically minded brother, Mark (Matthew Faber ), explains his philosophy that people cannot change their basic nature; they are like words that, frontward or backward, are always the same. Aviva is fighting for her body, her self, and Solondz imagines that as her right, at age 13, to have a baby—a position both sides of the abortion issue would heartily oppose.
Based on this sort of Talmudic thinking, Palindromes  should really be called Conundrums . I don't know another filmmaker who would have one character defend another against the charge of child molestation by explaining, "He's not a pedophile— pedophiles love children." The joke is funny not because it problematizes pedophilia or because it questions the meaning of love but because it takes the definition of pedophile  literally. If the point of A  Dirty Shame  was that nothing human is foreign to John Waters, Palindromes  seems to suggest that, for Todd Solondz, everything human is.
