Magnificent desolation  - Buzz Aldrin’s lyrical description of the moonscape, as seen from its lonesome surface  - has inspired poets and artists. But to science-fiction filmmakers and writers, the phrase usually inspires terror. Travel to Mars, the stars, and beyond often risks a killer case of space madness. So it goes, screamingly, in “Pandorum,’’ a highly effective sci-fi thriller set during a 2174 mission to colonize a far-off, newly discovered Earth-like planet.
One  crewman (Ben Foster) revives from deep hypersleep into a nightmare. The ship is ominously dark, its reactor broken. Bad signs  - spiders in the air shafts! Oozing crud on the walls!  - ought to alert the crew, if not the audience, that they’ve slumbered too long.  Despite  help from the ranking officer (Dennis Quaid), the crisis worsens. It’s testament to Quaid’s skill as an actor that he seems genuinely creeped out by the situation, even though he’s played astronauts so often he seems qualified to pilot the space shuttle.
More disconcerting are the dreadful growls coming from deep within the craft’s shadowy metallic corridors. Could these be symptoms of what the movie calls Pandorum madness  - the demons of the mind, demons mutated and escaped from a genetic storage facility, or something worse?
Naturally, it’s something worse.
Director Christian Alvart and screenwriter Travis Malloy must have seen “Aliens’’ in the cradle, for they’ve digested it with love and delivered smart thrills that will please more than genre fans. The filmmakers understand the difference between cheap shocks of gruesome discovery and the shudder that comes when a character casts a backward half-look over the shoulder toward terrors more familiar.
As one doomed character warns, pointing at the hero’s gun before fleeing into the recesses of the spaceship, “That’s not going to save you.’’
“Pandorum’’ is a dark, disquieting dream worth watching out for.

In Pandorum , spaceship crewmen Ben Foster and Dennis Quaid awaken from hyper-sleep in some distant corner of the galaxy to discover they have no memory of what they're doing there. In addition, while they were slumbering in the Land of Hyper-Nod, their vessel has been overrun by homicidal albino ghouls. Are the monsters real or are our heroes suffering from ''pandorum,'' a disease whose symptoms include shaking hands, bleeding noses, and going totally nuts? And, as a follow-up question, how brazenly can one film rip off Alien , I Am Legend , and, somewhat oddly, The Poseidon Adventure ? As always, Foster sells the hell out of his role but non-sci-fi fans may well themselves be driven mad long before the end.



Named for a mix of paranoia and delirium, "Pandorum" more strongly evokes the condition of deja vu. Pilfering from "Alien" and "The Descent," as well as artier movies in which astronauts suffer cabin fever, director Christian Alvart ("Antibodies") leans heavily on quick-cut shots of snarling flesh-eaters aboard a spaceship and still manages to tempt the viewer into hypersleep. Underutilized stars Dennis Quaid and Ben Foster won't keep Overture's medium-budget sci-fi horror vehicle from plummeting hard after liftoff.
Rudely awakened from cryogenic slumber aboard their 22nd-century mission to locate a habitable substitute for Earth, Lt. Payton (Quaid) and Cpl. Bower (Foster) find they can't remember the reason for their trip; nor can they make radio contact with anyone else in space.
After a great deal of wandering in the dark, homesick Bower discovers the dead bodies of fellow crew members, some bodies that look dead but aren't, some warring survivors with very sharp knives, and dozens upon dozens of beasts that bear a striking resemblance to the gurgling, bald-headed, sharp-toothed baddies of "The Descent." As if these creatures weren't challenging enough, Payton and Bower also have to reboot an onboard nuclear reactor -- and, natch, fend off "pandorum."
Seemingly in deference to budgetary concerns, top-billed Quaid is for the most part relegated to reading dialogue into an intercom ("Bower, do you read me?") as his character coaches Foster's more adventuresome one through various close encounters. Action-film vets Cam Gigandet ("Never Back Down") and Cung Le ("Fighting"), playing shipboard toughs, are called upon to perform hand-to-hand (and hand-to-claw) combat, none of it exciting. As the vessel's token female, newcomer Antje Traue delivers her lines in a husky whisper, which gets old fast, as does Alvart's familiar habit of making every faintly illuminated pipe and tube onboard look like a potential alien limb.
Special effects are none too convincing, while sound effects are of the cheaply jolting variety favored by producer Paul W.S. Anderson in his films as director ("Resident Evil," "Event Horizon"). Other tech credits are, like the pic as a whole, lazily derivative.
Camera (color, widescreen), Wedigo von Schultzendorff; editor, Philipp Stahl, Yvonne Valdez; music, Michl Britsch; production designer, Richard Bridgland; supervising art director, Adam O'Neill; art directors, Cornelia Ott, Ralf Schreck; set decorator, Bernhard Henrich; costume designer, Ivana Milos; sound (Dolby/DTS/SDDS), Manfred Banach; supervising sound editor, Adrian Baumeister; sound designer, Jurgen Funk; makeup effects, Stan Winston Studio; makeup effects supervisors, Shane Mahan, Lindsay Macgowan; special effects supervisor, Gerd Feuchter; visual effects supervisor, Viktor Muller; stunt coordinator, Francois Doge; assistant director, Hendrik Holler; casting, Randi Hiller, Sarah Halley Finn, Ana Davila. MPAA Rating: R. Reviewed at AMC Southdale 16, Edina, Minn., Sept. 24, 2009. Running time: 108 MIN.
 

