 Paranoid Park is a swooping skateboarding free zone where young men learn to fly. It’s also the title of Gus Van Sant’s most recent film, a haunting, voluptuously beautiful portrait of a teenage boy who, after being suddenly caught in midflight, falls to earth. Like most of Mr. Van Sant’s films “Paranoid Park” is about bodies at rest and in motion, and about longing, beauty, youth and death, and as such as much about the artist as his subject. It is a modestly scaled triumph without a false or wasted moment.  One of the most important and critically marginalized American filmmakers working in the commercial mainstream, Mr. Van Sant has traveled from down-and-out independent to Hollywood hire to aesthetic iconoclast, a trajectory that holds its own fascination and mysteries. The Hungarian filmmaker Bela Tarr has been instrumental in Mr. Van Sant’s recent artistic renaissance — evident in his newfound love of hypnotically long and gliding camera moves — though his tenure in the mainstream has left its mark too, as demonstrated by his rejection of straight narrative. As in three-act, character-driven, commercially honed narrative in which boys will be boys of a certain type and girls will be girls right alongside them.  The boy in “Paranoid Park,” Alex (the newcomer Gabe Nevins), lives and skates in Portland, Ore., where one evening he is implicated in the brutal death of a security guard. In adapting the young-adult novel by Blake Nelson, Mr. Van Sant has retained much of the story — a man dies, Alex writes it all down — but has reshuffled the original’s chain of events to create an elliptical narrative that continually folds back on itself. Shortly after the film opens, you see Alex writing the words Paranoid Park in a notebook, a gesture that appears to set off a flurry of seemingly disconnected visuals — boys leaping through the air in slow motion, clouds racing across the sky in fast — that piece together only later.  With his on-and-off narration and pencil, Alex is effectively shaping this story, but in his own singular voice. (“I’m writing this a little out of order. Sorry. I didn’t do so well in creative writing.”) Although you regularly hear that voice — at times in Alex’s surprisingly childish, unmodulated recitation, at times in dialogue with other characters — you mostly experience it visually, as if you were watching a still-evolving film unwinding in the boy’s head. Mr. Van Sant isn’t simply trying to take us inside another person’s consciousness; he’s also exploring the byways, dead ends, pitfalls and turning points in the geography of conscience, which makes the recurrent image of the skate park — with its perilous ledges, its soaring ramps and fleetingly liberated bodies — extraordinarily powerful.  Mr. Van Sant’s use of different film speeds and jump cuts, and his tendency to underscore his own storytelling — he regularly, almost compulsively repeats certain images and lines — reinforces rather than undermines the story’s realism. With its soft, smudged colors and caressing lighting, “Paranoid Park” looks like a dream — the cinematographers are Christopher Doyle and Rain Kathy Li — but the story is truer than most kitchen-sink dramas. This isn’t the canned realism of the tidy psychological exegesis; this is realism that accepts the mystery and ambiguity of human existence. It is the realism that André Bazin sees in the world of Roberto Rossellini: a world of “pure acts, unimportant in themselves,” that prepare the way “for the sudden dazzling revelation of their meaning.”  The pure acts in “Paranoid Park” mostly involve young male skateboarders gliding and sometimes hurtling through the air. Shot in both grainy Super-8 and velvety 35-millimeter film, these bodies appear alternately grounded and out of this world, reflecting extremes of physical effort while also suggesting different states of being. The Super-8 images of young men rolling along concrete, flipping boards and attitude, have the vaguely battered quality of old home movies, as if someone had just pulled the footage from a drawer. The glossier 35-millimeter images, by contrast, look almost monumental, epic, nowhere more so than when Mr. Van Sant shows one after another skateboarder suspended in the air at the peak of his jump, each a vision of Icarus.  Closer to earth, Alex roams through his world like an alien, a zombie, a prisoner, mostly mute, his features fixed, face blank and impenetrable. He says little, betrays less. His smiles are brief, infrequent. He’s adrift in a sea of near-strangers, including his parents, who are almost as conceptual as those in “Peanuts”  (Dad’s tattoos notwithstanding), and his girlfriend (Taylor Momsen), a coltish cheerleader who wants to lose her virginity to him for the sake of convenience. (Mr. Van Sant has rarely been as patient with his female characters as he is with his male ones.) Alex’s single close connection is with his friend Jared (Jake Miller), who brings him to the skate park with the warning “No one’s ever really ready for Paranoid Park.”  Mr. Van Sant has always made a home for lost boys, from River Phoenix’s wanderer in “My Own Private Idaho” to the ghostly Kurt Cobain figure who roams through “Last Days,” those downy, itinerant beauties whose words stick to their tongues and whose pain seems as bottomless as their eyes. In some respects Paranoid Park represents adulthood; the critic Amy Taubin has provocatively suggested to Mr. Van Sant that the film’s subtext is that of a gay initiation. (He didn’t disagree.) Both readings are ripe for the picking. But what strikes me the hardest about “Paranoid Park” is the intimacy, the love — carnal, paternal, human — of Mr. Van Sant’s expansive, embracing vision. No one is ever really ready for Paranoid Park, but neither do you have to go there alone.  “Paranoid Park” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). There is an extremely graphic, unflinchingly brutal image of a dying man.

Another immersion in the slacker/grunge milieu by Gus Van Sant, "Paranoid Park" is a deeply subjective portrait of a teenager's state of denial about a death he has inadvertently caused. Through immaculate use of picture, sound and time, the director adds another panel to his series of pictures about disaffected, disconnected youth. Aesthetically in line with "Gerry," "Elephant" and "Last Days," this is a rarified, arid artwork that will register with Van Sant's hardcore fans but leave anyone looking for more conventional satisfactions, notably teenagers themselves, impatient and unfulfilled. Commercial career of this French-financed feature will follow in the very modest footsteps of the helmer's recent work.
Based on a novel by Blake Nelson, who grew up in Portland, Ore. -- where Van Sant lives and works -- "Paranoid Park" exists in a world of "throwaway kids" who are into skateboarding above all else, and for which the writer-director clearly has an enthusiasm he is unable to stimulate in the viewer. Title refers to a homemade boarding facility popular with the sport's more renegade practitioners.
At the center of the tale, which has been severely fractured into a nonlinear form intended to convey a state of mind more than a series of events, is Alex (Gabe Nevins), a good-looking, shaggy-haired 16-year-old who is variously seen writing in a diary and watching, more than participating in, skateboarding, at which he feels he's not that good.
Early on, it's revealed a security guard has been run over in the rail yards and that foul play is suspected. A detective's ginger questioning of Alex, then of the school's entire skateboarding community, suggests that the unassertive, mild-mannered Alex was somehow involved. But the pic, along with Alex, bides its time, tending to quotidian matters, including his strictly reactive relationships with a couple of girls, and navigation between his divorcing parents, while postponing any action stemming from his guilt over what he did, however unintentional it was.
Viewed from the most mordant perspective, the pic could be considered a caustic critique of a kid's total unwillingness to assume responsibility for a grave action, a refusal to face the moral, not to mention legal, dimensions of his accidental act. But this wouldn't seem to be Van Sant's intent, as the impressionistic use of beautifully lit, often mobile images and idiosyncratic use of musical overlays appear more generously designed to portray Alex's paranoia and fear, his avoidance syndrome, his unwillingness to weigh and meditate on the ramifications of his actions.
The style eliminates so many potential dimensions of the story that the film is devoid of the elements audiences normally expect of films, beginning with drama, emotion, engagement and insight. On a moment-by-moment basis, one is most often objectively admiring the lovely work of cinematographer Christopher Doyle, whose 35mm shooting stands in marked contrast to the raw Super 8 skateboarding footage done by Rain Kathy Li.
Just as noticeable and/or distracting is the diverse musical collage that comprises the soundtrack. Dominating are the strains of Fellini stalwart Nino Rota, several of whose themes from "Juliet of the Spirits," and one from "Amarcord," stand in drastic emotional contrast to Alex's benumbed state.
As Alex drives around at one point, snippets of rap, classical music and ambient sound are successively intercut, and there are many other similar juxtapositions. As with the visual style, these artistic elements stand at the fore of the film's experience, acting independently on the viewer rather than discreetly serving the material.
Casting was done via MySpace, and young thesps are generally all right, although a bit stiff at moments. Girls portrayed by Lauren McKinney and Taylor Momsen come across with particular credibility, although a (notably ungraphic) loss of virginity scene must certainly be unparalleled in screen history for its lack of impact on one of the participants.

The pleasing circularity of Gus Van Sant 's masterful Paranoid Park  is not only a function of the film's narrative structure but reflects the arc of its maker's career. Few directors have revisited their earliest concerns with such vigor.
Van Sant's debut, the 1985 Mala Noche , was a moody drizzle of images evoking the Portland skid-row convenience-store manager's hopeless infatuation with a Mexican street kid. That $25,000 cheap-ster was followed by wary engagement with the mainstream in the form of star vehicles, feel-good Oscar fodder, and literary adaptations, as well as a perverse shot-by-shot remake of Psycho . Ultimately and unexpectedly, Van Sant returned to the Pacific Northwest  and minimalist low-budget filmmaking; the lyrical yet gritty Paranoid Park  cashes the check that Mala Noche  wrote.
Paranoid Park  is adapted, with reasonable fidelity, from Blake Nelson 's young-adult novel. But in telling the tale of a Portland skater kid involved in the accidental death of a railroad bull, Van Sant comes close to inventing his own film language. The chronology is shuffled and the narrative dealt out as a succession of subjective impressions. Paranoid Park  is both loose and structured, fluidly shot in 35mm, Super-8, and videotape by Chris Doyle  and suavely jagged in its editing. There are passages that approach pure cinema, though never abstraction, grounded as the action is in Leslie Shatz 's layered sound design, an audio mosaic that effortlessly integrates Nino Rota , Beethoven , obscure whispering, and a 1974 pop ballad with a trippy organ riff.
High school is a terrain of infinite interest to Van Sant, and, in a sense, Paranoid Park  is a companion piece to his Columbine -inspired Elephant . The institutional corridors are automatically haunted. In its sensuous appreciation of a particular subculture, however, Paranoid Park  also echoes aspects of Kenneth Anger 's underground mix of Brooklyn  bikers and Brill Building  anthems, Scorpio Rising . Van Sant's skateboarders are shot as though participating in the Olympics: Beautiful young boys twist and hurtle through space in fetishizing slow motion, defying gravity before they drop careening into the concrete amphitheater (a squatters' arena beneath the Eastside Bridge) that gives the movie its name—as well as suggesting its hero's mind-set.
Mala Noche  was a movie about unrequited passion; Paranoid Park  communicates a comparable obsession. Van Sant is not only fascinated by the denizens of Paranoid Park; so is his hero, Alex (Gabe Nevins ), a hulking yet delicate high-school junior with the clear, grave gaze of a Renaissance princeling (albeit one found by Van Sant—as were most of the teenage non-professional actors here—on MySpace ). And Van Sant is also obsessed with Alex, who is pure freshness of youth—navigating his adolescent vicissitudes with an affect that seems alternately present and totally dissociated. The movie's key scene has Alex venturing alone to Paranoid Park. In the Nelson book, he finds himself hanging out with a group of "street punks"; in the movie, it's more like he's been picked up. In both, Alex's musing that he wished he had more feelings for his almost-girlfriend Jennifer segues into his leaving Paranoid Park with an older, vaguely dangerous guy named Scratch, who is going to show him how to hop a freight train. Alex will spend much of the movie trying to articulate what it was that happened next, but it does involve seeing a man sliced in half.
As the TV news intrudes on the film, it also breaks into Alex's consciousness and ours—just as Alex's kid brother does with a breathless account of a scene from the teenage comedy Napoleon Dynamite  . There's more inner life here than in Elephant . Nevins, whose line readings imbue the action with a sense of sluggish panic, is most eloquent in his hesitations, and Van Sant's rapport with his cast is easier. A few long takes in which a friendly cop interrogates a roomful of skater kids yield a maximal amount of improvisation. More discreet, the sequence in which the virginal Jennifer (Gossip Girl  's Taylor Momsen ) seduces the less-than-interested Alex is a matter of mega close-ups and shallow focus. "We're gonna need some more condoms," she exclaims in the afterglow. A high-school cheerleader, she can barely wait to rush into the bathroom and cell-phone her friends: "Ya-ah, we totally did it! Omigod, it was fantastic!" (The dialogue is from the novel.)
Alex finds himself drawn to another girl, less conventionally pretty but considerably smarter than Jennifer. "Figure it out, dude," she tells him—referring to the war in Iraq , but really addressing the mystery at the movie's heart. What's truly uncanny about Paranoid Park  isn't so much the nature of the trauma that Alex suffers, but the way his world is made to shimmer with adolescent magic. He may be lost, but Paranoid Park  is wonderfully lucid: It makes confusion something tangible and heartbreak the most natural thing in life.
