         Terrorism is the nightmare of these times, the sum of all our fears, the engine that drives the world's movie melodramas and war machines alike. But the more we see of it, the less we understand. What is the lure, for instance, of suicide bombing? Who embraces it? What can lead an individual to act on the boast "he who is not afraid of death is in control of life"?
 
  "Paradise Now" answers all these questions, but not in the way you might expect. A powerful, poignant, provocative drama, it gets its strength from its dispassion, from an uncompromising determination to explain rather than justify or condemn, to put a human face on incomprehensible acts.
 


         






    In a movie world that is more than happy to see terrorists as conveniently hooded and hackneyed villains, "Paradise Now" is an anomaly. Like the regrettably little-seen Indian film "The Terrorist" of a few years back, it understands that if we don't realize that recognizable human beings do these acts, we have little chance of stopping them.
 
  Even more radical, this film has the nerve and skill to turn daily headlines into a heart-stopping story whose urgency is startling. A Palestinian-European co-production shot largely in the West Bank town of Nablus by a Palestinian director/co-writer (Hany Abu-Assad) now living in the Netherlands, "Paradise Now" was a sensation at Berlin, where it won three awards. You may think you'll be seeing this film for its relevance, but its life-and-death drama is what will keep you transfixed.
 
  Even though we know the film focuses on what might be the final hours in the lives of suicide bombers, when we meet Said (Kais Nashef) and Khaled (Ali Suliman), our instinctive reaction is "It can't be them." A pair of regular guys, these genial, empathetic slackers, now employed at a West Bank auto repair shop, have been close friends since childhood.
 
  Like many twentysomethings in movies, Said and Khaled are intelligent but a bit aimless, not really believing it when they say "one day things will be better." The only bright spot in either of their lives is Suha (Lubna Azabal), the beautiful daughter of a martyred Palestinian leader who's returned to Nablus after time spent in Europe and is attracted to the dreamy Said rather than the hotheaded Khaled.
 
  Then, not for the last time, "Paradise Now" changes tone and direction. A friend named Jamal (Amer Hlehel) approaches, his face shining, with news out of nowhere. There is a suicide mission scheduled for the very next day in Tel Aviv and the two lifelong friends will get their expressed wish of carrying it out together. They are our bombers, after all.
 
  "Paradise Now's" next section involves goodbyes without saying goodbye, as both men take leave of their families without being able to tell them that the next day is anything special. Said also takes the opportunity to visit Suha. Noticing a photograph of her father, he begins one of the film's several pointed political interchanges by saying she must be proud of him. "I'd rather he were still alive than be proud of him," she replies. "There are other ways to keep the cause alive."
 
  Gradually, through this conversation and others like it, we learn the reasons, deeply personal as well as political, that have brought these men, not noticeably fanatical or especially religious, to a point in their lives where not having a meaningless death becomes a meaningful goal. We see the price paid for the humiliation of cultural dehumanization, and even if we completely disagree we grasp why Said and Khaled feel "under the occupation we're already dead" and "life without dignity is worthless."
 
  After seeing the two men film surreal "martyr videos" and watching them suit up like matadors before a bullfight, all that came before becomes mere prequel as "Paradise Now" takes its final, most compelling twist into pure chaos.
 
  By now we know and care about these two men, so the thought of their death and the deaths they intend to inflict horrifies and saddens us. Their story becomes increasingly terrifying as personal and organization forces come to bear on them and their decision in ways no one had anticipated.
 
  What makes "Paradise Now" so effective from beginning to end is its determination not to take sides, not even by so much as a wink. A filmmaker since 1992, Abu-Assad and his co-writer Bero Beyer did extensive research on suicide bombers, and the director's determination to be evenhanded made location filming an enormously dangerous operation that nearly cost crew members their lives. Uppermost in Abu-Assad's mind is always the human equation, how impossible it is to be an individual put in the position of having to decide, starting with yourself, who shall live and who shall die. It is the question of our times.
 
 'Paradise Now'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for mature thematic material and brief strong language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Adult subject matter
 
 Released by Warner Independent Pictures. Director Hany Abu-Assad. Producers Hengameh Panahi, Amir Harel, Gerhard Meixner, Roman Paul, Bero Beyer. Screenplay Hany Abu-Assad and Bero Beyer.   

Of all the shocks in the riveting and timely political thriller Paradise Now , the most unsettling may be the dignity bestowed on a pair of prospective Palestinian suicide bombers — not horrified condemnation, not rabid support, just calm regard for a couple of young men prepared to kill themselves and others for what they believe is a just cause.
Is there room and time for such neutral consideration of terrorism? Saïd (Kais Nashef) and Khaled (Ali Suliman), West Bank car mechanics and friends since childhood, prepare overnight for their ''holy'' mission to murder Israelis the next day in Tel Aviv (the rituals of readiness are depicted with precision, and sometimes with jolting humor). And Palestinian director and co-writer Hany Abu-Assad suggests that taking the time to understand the grievances of angry young men like Saïd and Khaled is time well spent. Abu-Assad, who also made the lighter but no less politically engaged 2003 drama Rana's Wedding , doesn't condone the murder the bombers think they are ready to commit — whether they will or not is the nail-biter — but he also empathizes with what could fuel such desperate frustration. (An attractive woman friend of Saïd's argues for positive political change and articulately abhors the escalation of violence.)  Shooting with energy and a great sense of storytelling, Abu-Assad gambles, astutely, that disappointing those who demand complete condemnation — or support — is a risk worth taking if it furthers the causes of peace and justice, not to mention exciting filmmaking.


A general low-level intensity rather than real emotional and political fireworks mark "Paradise Now," recounting 27 hours in the lives of two Palestinian suicide bombers as they prep for and embark on a mission to Tel Aviv. Handsomely shot in widescreen, mostly on actual West Bank locations, and well-played by the cast, pic lays out the issues in an accessible but rather too over-correct way, seemingly eager to please all parties at the expense of real passion. Still, subject matter should ensure a steady fest career, with some theatrical pickups, especially in Europe.
Third feature by Palestinian helmer Hany Abu-Assad is, curiously, less involving that his breakout movie, "Rana's Wedding" (2003), which, though a romantic drama, burned with a stronger fire about the inequities in Palestinians' daily lives than "Paradise."Though it has many fine qualities, "Paradise" feels like a victim of constant rewrites -- script dates from four years ago -- and a flattening effect of Euro involvement in the production. Anyone expecting a gritty, impassioned insight into the psychology of suicide bombers will come away disappointed; general auds may be better pleased.
Attractive young Arab woman Suha (Lubna Azabal) crosses an Israeli checkpoint on her way to the West Bank town of Nablus. Born in France, raised in Morocco and from a well-off family, Suha has a cross-tracks liking for Said (Kais Nashef), a Palestinian raised in a refugee camp. Said works at a small garage business with his pal, fellow Palestinian Khaled (Ali Suliman).
For Said and Khaled, it's just another lazy afternoon in Nablus, drinking tea and smoking a nargilah
 on the side of a hill overlooking the town in which they're boxed in by Israeli authorities. Until, that is, Jamal (Amer Hlehel), their point man for an unnamed guerrilla org, takes Said aside and tells them he and Khaled have been chosen for a suicide bombing in Tel Aviv, in response to the recent killing of two Arabs.
For security, Jamal stays at Said's side, as Said returns home for what is to be his final night with his mother (vet Hiam Abbass, from "The Syrian Bride"). Said manages to sneak away in the middle of the night for a meeting with Suha, which ends on an unresolved emotional note, and him not letting on about his mission.
The simplicity of these scenes, as Said and Khaled accept the assignment with a quiet pride and serenity, has a power of its own, reinforced by equally spare scenes the following morning of him and Khaled being bathed, purified and given a final meal by the guerrilla group. Tone is less intense than similar scenes in last year's docudrama, "The Hamburg Cell," about some of the 9/11 participants.
With the addition of some humor in a sequence where the two record their final testament and are forced to do a retake when the vidcam goes on the fritz, helmer seems to be making it clear that "Paradise Now" is pitched at a far more mainstream level that the subject would suggest. And with Suha as the voice of educated reason by an outsider, the script has already started to rep various shades of opinion. She's for a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian problem, arguing they'll always be outclassed by Israeli military might.
At pic's midway point, as the two men slip through the wire into Israeli-occupied territory, things start to go wrong. Said goes temporarily AWOL, and the guerrillas' leader, Abu-Karem (Ashraf Barhoum), threatens to abort the mission; little turns out as originally planned.
Second half of the film, with all its criss-crossing of the border fence, and signs of wavering first by Said and then (more unbelievably) by Khaled, is almost too busy for any real tension to develop. And apart from the opening scene with Suha crossing a checkpoint, there's almost zero sense of working undercover, or of being found out at any minute. In short, pic's early, contained style fails to develop into anything more gripping.
Still, performances are fine, with Nashef especially and Suliman more fitfully bringing their characters alive, and rising star Azabal (so good in "Viva Algeria") doing her best with a schematic role. Abbass is also quietly impressive as Said's mom, who may or may not have guessed her son's fate.
Tech package is very good, with no signs of the difficult shoot on mostly real locations (with additional shooting in Nazareth when things got too hot on the West Bank). Music would have been an assist in building more tension and emotional involvement.

Paradise Now  is the second film this season to explore the terra incognita of current political psychology—namely the mind of a suicide bomber. Contrived but chilling, Hany Abu-Assad 's feature tells the tale of West Bank  auto mechanics whose mission in Israel  goes unexpectedly awry.
As its distributor has been quick to point out, this is a movie that epitomizes risk—and not just from a commercial perspective. Making Paradise Now  was a heroic undertaking; the movie was shot on location in Nablus , as well as Abu-Assad's hometown, Nazareth , with the filmmakers dodging near daily firefights and missile attacks while walking a cautious line between the Israeli occupying army and various Palestinian armed factions. The politics are similarly ambiguous or, rather, complex.
Audaciously as well, Abu-Assad imbues Paradise Now  with a measure of dark absurdism. The youthful mechanics—Sa (Kais Nashef) and Khaled (Ali Suliman )—receive their assignments only a day in advance. The most elaborate preparation involves the videotaping of their farewell statements. (Later we discover that local video emporiums do a brisk business in the sale and rental of such martyr tapes—as well as their opposite, tapes that document the execution of Palestinian "traitors.") A true filmmaker, Abu-Assad does not resist the temptation to restage the tawdry mise-en-scéne, amateurish overdirection, and maladroit camera operation involved in the making of the tape. He's less specific regarding the nature of the cell that has recruited Sa and Khaled—it seems too secular to be Hamas , insufficiently ideological for the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade .
Paradise Now  suffers from some odd continuity glitches and takes a few too many narrative curves en route to an overly convoluted ending, but the heart of the movie is as tense as the bus ride in Hitchcock's Sabotage . Newly shaved and anointed, the human time bombs are sent off, amid a hubbub of prayers, to cross the green line (with surprising ease) into Israel. It is in this sequence, with the terrorists wandering in their "wedding suits" through a landscape that they have never before seen, that Paradise Now  packs a powerful existential wallop. The friends are separated. Lost amid his potential victims, Sa experiences disorientation, doubt, and the stolid acceptance of his fate until, in the first of several reversals, it becomes necessary to sneak back across the border.
A Palestinian-Dutch-German-French co-pro, Paradise Now  was also workshopped at Sundance, and as has been pointed out, it has certain Amerindie characteristics— including a carefully worked-out backstory and a number of didactic scenes in which the action grinds to a halt to allow for the expression of varied points of view. The prime vehicle for both is the cosmopolitan Suha (Lubna Azabal ), a character who functions both as Sa romantic interest and his rational foil. Her politics are closer to those of Hanan Ashrawi . She opposes terrorism and argues for the power of public opinion.
Sa by contrast is acting from a sense of personal shame. "The crimes of the occupation are countless," he tells her and then, in direct address, "I will not go back to the refugee camp." He has his reasons. Paradise Now  may not succeed in inspiring sympathy for these hapless terrorists, but it does compel an appreciation for the unbearable sense of humiliation that may fuel such acts.
