
"Pathfinder " is not a movie about the best - selling SUV. It does, however, serve up another helping of ancient carnage. The movie is part "Apocalypto " (warriors, threat of hostile takeover, violence!) and part "300 " (warriors, threat of hostile takeover, violence!), but with the commercial misfortune of being neither. Like "Apocalypto," it's a monotonously single-minded chase picture. Yet like "300," it's best when bombastic.
The story dabbles in fiction (the film calls it "legend"), settling us in North America "500 years before Columbus will reach its shores," and among the Wampanoag Indians, who called what is now New England home. They take in a blond Viking orphan, discovered lost in the ruins of a massive Norse longship . They name him Ghost , presumably since Tarzan , Annie , and Dances With Wolves were taken. Young Ghost grows into Karl Urban , the New Zealand action star with the kind eyes. When Vikings lay waste to his family, he flees into the vast wilderness, where another group takes him in and dresses his wounds.
But the Germanic-sounding Norsemen -- large, hairy, interchangeable boors, two of whom are allegedly played by Clancy Brown and German he-man Ralf Moeller -- are on Ghost's trail. And he doesn't want harm to visit his new caretakers, so he strikes out on his own, only to be followed by Starfire (Moon Bloodgood ), the strong but smitten daughter of the tribe's wise leader, Pathfinder (Russell Means ). Calling the movie "Ghost" would just have been too confusing. Plus, the old man is beside the point --all the Indians are, really.
"'Pathfinder" is only interesting to the filmmakers and, sadly, to us when the hairy dudes stalk Ghost, capture him and Starfire , then force him to lead them all back to the protectors he just left. What the movie lacks in developed Indian characters, anthropological rigor, and dialogue, it makes up for in grueling action sequences. One is set on a frozen lake, the other on a mountainside cliff. Only then does the German director Marcus Nispel , a veteran of music videos and the man behind 2003's "Texas Chainsaw Massacre " remake, really seem up for doing any filmmaking. He and his crew choreograph some excitement. But those are two set pieces in a 99-minute adventure that feels longer than that.
Urban and Bloodgood make the most of their parts, locking eyes and arms, and occasionally using American English as if the snowy 10th century were another way of saying, "Where the après ski?" Urban is especially well suited for movies like "Pathfinder": barely speaking, barely clothed. If there's any justice, someone will keep him in mind for "300 II."


         "Pathfinder" is one of the funniest films of the year. That's not good news for this attempted action-adventure, which clearly lost its way in its own copious fog.
 
 The setup is good: One of the Viking expeditions to reach North America hundreds of years before Columbus leaves as its only survivor a 10-year-old boy. The child is raised by Indians, who call him "Ghost," either because of his pale skin or because they know the film will be haunted by clichés from a thousand other movies. Years later, the Norsemen return to exterminate all Indians and only the native-friendly Ghost (Karl Urban) can stop them. Dismemberments ensue.
 


         






   From this, the filmmakers manage to generate nothing new — only the same old, tired cinematic language: ethereal white horses, women scared by dead bodies, prophecies to fulfill, and fog. Lots of fog. Seriously, they went a little bananas with the fog. And yet the filmmakers don't seem to have the foggiest: Visibility is low, risibility is high.
 
 "Pathfinder" jarringly straddles worlds. These Vikings are apparently not from North Atlantic regions but the darkest depths of Mordor, judging from their ornate black armor and malevolent laughter. The dialogue makes furtive stabs at an era-specific tone but pokes into modern register. It does yield such gems as "There are two wolves fighting in every man's heart — one is love, one is hate."
 
 Native Americans may not wolf down the depiction of their forebears as helpless, cowardly and weak. So much for being in tune with nature: They can't detect a company of armored horsemen charging at them. Thank goodness there's a circa 900-A.D. Rambo to save them.
 
 Poor Karl Urban. Since the "Lord of the Rings" movies, his path has found the likes of "Doom" and "The Chronicles of Riddick." The tribe's leader, or "Pathfinder," character is played by Russell Means of "The Last of the Mohicans" — and there's a mercy-kill moment in the new film that's a straight steal from "Mohicans." The women have little more to do than whimper and scream at the many "boo" moments director Marcus Nispel (2003's "Texas Chainsaw Massacre") insists upon.
 
 "Pathfinder" is inspired by an Oscar-nominated 1987 Norwegian film ("Ofelas") but relocated from Lapland to North America for the Vikings-and-Indians angle. This preposterous version is aimed strictly at teenage boys, with its arterial sprays and mysterious machismo.
 
 This one is an instant "Mystery Science Theatre 3000" classic, ideal for watching on TV with loud friends.
 
 "Pathfinder." MPAA rating: R for strong brutal violence throughout. Running time: 1 hour, 28 minutes. In general release.   

 All grunting, all goring, the witless action flick "Pathfinder" has little to recommend it, though Terrence Malick completists may be interested to know that it rips off a few setups from that master's magnum opus   "The New World." The time is the 10th century A.D., "500 years before Columbus," or so it says in some introductory text, and the place is some pastoral if murkily shaded, almost monochromatic, stretch of coast, where native peoples hunt, fish and smile with what's meant to be the wisdom of the ages but registers as cultural cliché.  Into this paradise comes a Norseman of the apocalypse, or rather a whole boatload, thundering off a ship from the Old World to pillage and wreak ruin with clanging steel, swinging mace and lots and lots of grunting. There's a hero, of course, a Viking throwaway who had been dropped on the native doorstep some 15 years earlier and has grown up to become Karl Urban or, actually, a vaporous character named Ghost. The Vikings return;  carnage ensues.  The director, Marcus Nispel, takes his butchery very seriously. (He was the lead vivisectionist for the remake of "The Texas Chain Saw Massacre.") He may not be able to make this movie move, but, man, can he make an eyeball fly.  "Pathfinder" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). A splatterfest.

Savage Vikings are outwitted by one of their own in "Pathfinder," a visionary chest-thumper set 600 years before Columbus. Boldly reinventing Norway's 1988 Oscar nominee "Ofelas," musicvid director Marcus Nispel relocates the adventure to primeval America, where evidence suggests the European invaders landed but did not last. Like "300" and "Apocalypto," this latest bit of historical balder-dash stands in direct defiance of proven action-movie formulas, trusting its brutal concept and striking visuals to overcome a lack of star power. But without a muscular campaign, "Pathfinder" will likely draw only a fraction of their biz, despite "Conan"-like appeal to testosterone crowds.
Pic rolled out earlier this year in a dozen overseas territories and has grossed almost $10 million to date.
Permitting herself considerable creative license, screenwriter Laeta Kalogridis imagines what might have stopped Vikings from settling in North America. Story opens at the end of a failed first expedition as a lone Wampanaog Indian woman discovers a frightened young orphan in the belly of a smoldering Norse "dragon ship." She takes him home, where he is accepted into the tribe.
Fifteen years later, the invaders return, only now, the abandoned young man has grown into "Lord of the Rings" and "Xena: Warrior Princess" veteran Karl Urban, an oddly proportioned action hero whose Hugh Jackman-like facial features sit perched atop a beefcake frame. Urban spends most of the movie wearing little more than a leather loincloth, though editors Jay Friedkin and Glen Scantlebury seem to be working overtime cutting around his bulky but sub-Spartan physique.
While Urban strains to carry the movie, it is the monstrous Vikings who actually prove most compelling. An ominous lot, they lumber about in silhouette like the dark Orcs from Ralph Bakshi's "Lord of the Rings" cartoons, while Renee April's detailed costumes -- all horns and skulls and metal scales -- evoke the more recent live-action trilogy. The invaders' gnarled snorts and guttural Icelandic dialogue strike a fearsome contrast to the mild-tempered, English-speaking natives.
Something is clearly afoot in Hollywood that projects about ancient Mayan, Spartan and Viking showdowns are being developed and released. As a follow-up to Nispel's "Texas Chainsaw Massacre" remake, "Pathfinder" seems like sheer lunacy, the equivalent of Zack Snyder remaking Inuit chase movie "Atanarjuat the Fast Runner." And yet, with a visual sense to rival Ridley Scott's, Nispel ensures that every shot tells a story, mixing the meticulous landscape aesthetic of Hudson River School painters Thomas Cole and Asher B. Durand with the macabre imagery of contemporary fantasy artists, enhanced by the helmer's decision to shoot against real British Columbia wilderness.
Gone is the spare poetry and arctic mysticism of Gaup's original. Instead, Nispel trades in dense, sophisticated compositions. Reteaming with regular lenser Daniel C. Pearl, he stacks every frame with layers of movement and texture from extreme foreground to deep, distant background. Yet the pic has difficulty carrying a thought from one shot to the next.
Individual shots pack a strong emotional punch, but entire scenes -- such as a high-speed sled chase -- unfold with numb, disorienting confusion. In general, the pic handles action well. Whether fending off bear attacks or a full-blown avalanche, Ghost (as Urban's character is called) twirls his sword and attacks in the well-choreographed style of a true matinee idol.
But Nispel proves clumsy with actors, relying more on blocking than the nuances of actual performance. Characters are exaggerated cartoons, hardly human at all.
"Pathfinder's" Vikings are certainly evil enough, but they are largely faceless and interchangeable, with no one personality more despicable than the others. To evoke the desired feelings, the pic instead relies on cues from the City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus -- half bone-rattling marches, half martyr-minded arias.

