 You may not learn everything you want to know in “Patti Smith: Dream of Life,” an impressionistic portrait of that punk godhead, but you learn just about everything you need. Created over a heroic 11 years, it was directed and mostly shot by Steven Sebring, a high-end commercial photographer whose perseverance and conspicuous unfamiliarity with, or disregard for, the conventions of nonfiction cinema (not to mention the apparently deep-enough pockets that freed him to follow his own muse) have inspired a lovely, drifty first feature that feels less like a documentary and more like an act of rapturous devotion.  For old punks and new, such devotion is easy. Ms. Smith was born (in 1946),  wrote poetry, made rock ’n’ roll history, changed the world, part of it anyway.  “Dream of Life” tells some of that story, intimately and yet at arm’s length. If you want to know about punk, what it was like to play CBGB when it mattered (or on its final night, as Ms. Smith did in 2006),  look elsewhere. The same goes if you want to know what it was like to be on top of the world and on top of the charts, to watch Robert Mapplethorpe get his nipple pierced, sit at the feet of William S. Burroughs and shack up with Sam Shepard at the Chelsea Hotel.  All of those things happened sometime after 1967, the year Ms. Smith left South New Jersey  for New York. She shares tantalizingly  little about her unformed and formative years in the film, which opens with the image of galloping horses, horses, horses, horses and her speaking in present-day voice-over, narrating in that inimitable flat accent (“leanin’ on the paakin’ meter,” as she sings in “Gloria”), swiftly tallying the ups and dreadful downs, the births and deaths  that  had helped shape her until now. The film has barely begun before she’s offered forth a life’s worth of headline news, a strategy that allows Mr. Sebring and Ms. Smith, who is as much a collaborator as a subject, to fill the next 100 or so minutes with fragmented beauty and song.  For the most part, it is a song of life — by turns joyous and elegiac, warm and vibrantly present, a mosaic of moods and moments from one woman’s richly lived time on earth. Against the odds and punk’s dumber tendencies, Ms. Smith didn’t die young or succumb to the usual rock clichés. She did fade away, though intentionally: in 1979 she dissolved her band, the Patti Smith Group, leaving New York and her escalating fame behind for an apparently contented life as a suburban Detroit housewife, tucking into domesticity with her husband, the guitarist Fred Smith, and their children, Jackson (a son) and Jesse (a daughter). Then, in 1994, Mr. Smith died of heart failure.  The next month, her only brother, Todd, died too.  Ms. Smith re-emerged and joined Bob Dylan (a fugitive backstage presence here) on tour in late 1995. Mr. Sebring, who had met her that same year during a magazine photo shoot, started to tag along. He continued to do so over the next decade, shooting her performing on and off the stage (she never seems to turn off, though she does put her hand over the camera lens)  in color and high-, sometimes low-contrast black-and-white 16-millimeter film.  He followed her home and abroad, watched as she did a rubbing of Gregory Corso’s gravestone in Italy, visited  Rimbaud’s birthplace in France with a tattered copy of “A Season in Hell” and strolled through Jerusalem. A patient observer, Mr. Sebring kept shooting as she kept roaming, memorializing and living.  For the most part it’s a fairly relaxed trip. Ms. Smith’s pretty-boy looks have mellowed into a kind of weathered handsomeness — when her long, lean face is framed by two braids, you can imagine her leading a wagon train west or standing solitary guard on the prairie — and her vibe is similarly tempered and temperate. Yet while she seems very much at peace with herself and with her ghosts, she still burns white hot onstage, thrashing and raging (against George W. Bush, against the Iraq war) with the same propulsive energy and purpose that first drove this one-time poet to turn up the volume alongside the guitarist Lenny Kaye.  (He’s still around too.) For her  rock ’n’ roll feels like a mission and the fountain of life.  Working with the editors Angelo Corrao and Lin Polito, Mr. Sebring creates a structure for the film in which past and present seem to flow effortlessly and ceaselessly into each other. The little girl hovering next to Ms. Smith backstage becomes the young woman visiting John Lennon’s Central Park memorial with her mother. And so it goes, elegantly. The film’s central image, one Mr. Sebring returns to again and again, is of Ms. Smith in a softly lighted room filled with photos, mementos and miscellaneous bits and pieces, a room that’s as much a manifestation of memory as a physical space. Here in this refuge Patti Smith coos to her cat and flirts with Mr. Shepard, who drops by for a duet and briefly stops time.

The titular rocker-poet gets a suitable portrait in Steven Sebring's "Patti Smith: Dream of Life," which runs radically against the grain of American-made pop music docs. The result of 11 years of filming (much of it in wonderfully grainy black-and-white 16mm), pic is designed as a stream-of-consciousness experience, following Smith as she revives her music career and considers every aspect of her life. Death, too, plays a stark role, and the textured, thoughtful results may prove too cerebral and abstract for auds beyond Smith's hardcore followers, but long-term, this will be a loss-leader that gains much respect.
What Sebring -- a fashion and pop photographer, painter and commercials maker -- doesn't know about doc filmmaking never hurts the film. Starting in 1995, when Smith recorded her comeback album "Gone Again" and toured with her idol, Bob Dylan, after having not performed live for 16 years, Sebring's project clearly developed as it went along, and the effect of watching the film is seeing something in the making -- like rummaging through Smith's closet, and stumbling across interesting stuff.
In voiceover, Smith briefly sums up her background as the daughter of Chicago parents (Grant and Beverly Smith, both lovingly seen at home) and the cultural child of '60s art-political foment. At 23, a fledgling and serious poet, she became friends with artist Robert Mapplethorpe and teamed with him for a series of works that belonged to the early phases of performance art. Other encounters (such as with then-hell-raising playwright Sam Shepard) proved crucial, and led her into rock 'n' roll.
"Dream of Life" distinctively treat the particulars of her early career in only glancing references, none of them in chronological order, with Smith sometimes seen obliquely.
She sits in a corner of her bedroom amid some of her favorite personal and nostalgic objects (a childhood dress, a Persian urn containing the late Mapplethorpe's ashes), and mock-threatens Sebring to not budge until he's decided to finally finish the movie. She's seen almost sentimentally at her old home outside Detroit, where she moved after her halcyon New York days in the '70s. She visits the graves of the poets she reveres: Allen Ginsberg, Percy Shelley, William Blake, William S. Burroughs. Her manner is generally so gentle and meek that her angry, wild behavior onstage offers the impression of a woman with two different personalities.
Sebring, who operated his own camera for much of the filming, seems unsure how to lens and frame Smith onstage, as if intimidated by her animal side.
However, in the quiet of rooms and studios, or walking with Smith (and her daughter Jesse) through Central Park, or finding the right images to accompany her loving descriptions of the shocking number of people in her life who've died, (including her husband, Fred), the filmmaking is more assured, but also comfortably loose and able to respond to the moment. When Smith's son (and fellow bandmate) Jackson cuts up in front of Sebring's camera, it's exactly the sort of flotsam that a more conventional doc would trim; here, it's central to suggesting the world Smith inhabits.
Sebring has been supported by some fine (film) bandmates of his own, including co-d.p. Phillip Hunt, editors Angelo Corrao and Lin Polito, and masterful sound designers Margaret Crimmins and Greg Smith.


If Patti Smith 's narration to Dream of Life  was simplified into a stanza, it might go something like this: As long as I can remember I sought to be free/Bob Dylan  once tuned this guitar for me/My mission is to give people my energy/Fred, Jesse, and Jackson are my family tree/New generations, rise up, rise up, take to the streets/Me and Flea talking about pee.  Her much more long-winded monologues are just as randomly assembled in the actual documentary, 109 mostly black-and-white minutes of punk's wet nurse floating through the modern world while endlessly ruminating on mortality, art, and the occasional bodily function. Problem is, there's nary a hint of context, even with biographic essentials: When Patti sprinkles the ashes of "Robert" onto her palm, we're momentarily left to guess that's Mapplethorpe; when she and erstwhile paramour Sam Shepard  are acoustically jamming and their respective tattoos come up, the playwright muses, "That  was a weird night at the Chelsea." More, please? Blame first-time director Steven Sebring , the fashion photographer whom the "very private" Patti entrusted to film her for 11 years, and who says in regards to Dream of Life : "I want to turn people on to Patti Smith." If the resulting movie had been comprehensible to anyone besides those who have an armpit-hair fetish thanks to Easter , he might've stood a chance.
