
The prediction in "WALL-E" of a human race turned to spineless dumplings comes depressingly true in "Paul Blart: Mall Cop." As played by Kevin James, Paul doesn't appear to have any idea what his body can do or can't. He seems much more competent at work riding a Segway personal transport thingamajig than he does walking on his own two feet.
For the machine, James has devised some nice physical choreography. Stuffed in a snug security guard's uniform, his tubby body becomes a vision of weightlessness aboard the Segway, pirouetting around corners and glissading down hallways. But the pleasures of such sights are momentary since the movie, set at a New Jersey shopping center (but filmed at the Burlington Mall), turns from live-action Pixar
 to a particularly inept Looney Toon.
Paul pities himself, overeats, lives with his mother (Shirley Knight) and daughter (Raini Rodriguez), and desperately wants to date the bland girl (Jayma Mays) who runs the wig cart outside Zales. When acrobatic skate-thugs descend on the mall after hours and take hostages, Paul gets to play the hero. James co-wrote the movie (Steve Carr has barely directed it), and you can see how someone very bored and with a little showbiz clout might have an idea to cross "Marty" with "Die Hard."
But you also have to wonder whether the nacho-eating contests with a man twice his girth were James's idea or why he thought a scene with him stuck in an air vent with a growling stomach would bring down the house. (Actually, the night I watched this movie that scene did bring down the house.)
Elsewhere, hypoglycemia, hot sauce, Bobby Cannavale as a SWAT commander, and a climax at the Rainforest Café are put to execrable comic ends. The film itself, meanwhile, looks like something stubbed out in an ashtray. It's unlikely that even WALL-E could bring himself to scoop up this movie and leave it on his post-apocalyptic junk heap.


The title of this farce about an overeager   security guard (Kevin James) suggests a one-joke trudge. But Paul Blart: Mall Cop  has a few   surprises in store. The biggest is James, an   unexpectedly nimble master of the face-plant, the failed jump, and the lopsided tumble. The   former King of Queens  star also proves to be a warm leading man who grounds the movie as  it morphs into a loopy heist thriller after a promising start as something entirely   different: a gentle comedy of suburban underachievement.

 Fat people are funny. Fat people who fall over are funnier. Fat people who fall over and have humiliating working-class jobs? Stop, you’re killing me!  This would seem to be the entire guiding principle behind “Paul Blart: Mall Cop,” a tossed-off comedy from Adam Sandler’s production company that makes one long for the comparative genius of “I Now Pronounce You Chuck & Larry.”  In the title role, Kevin James plays a lovable New Jersey doofus whose dreams of joining the police are foiled by a hypoglycemic condition that causes him to pass out in ostensibly hilarious contexts. Reduced to working security at a huge, bustling shopping mall located in some economically vibrant fantasyland, Blart falls in love with the perky proprietress of a hair-extension franchise (Jayma Mays).  Enter — because why not? — a gang of thieves plotting to hack into the mall’s credit-card profits. Put down the nachos, Paul Blart! It’s time to, well, to fall over some more and bump into things and make silly faces and save the world and get the girl.  “Paul Blart: Mall Cop” is directed by Steve Carr, a man who knows how to put a camera in front of things, if little else, and written, sort of, by Nick Bakay and Mr. James.  “Paul Blart: Mall Cop” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for slapstick and language.

After wisely affixing himself to Will Smith ("Hitch") and Adam Sandler ("I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry"), Kevin James rides solo in "Paul Blart: Mall Cop," an almost shockingly amateurish one-note-joke comedy on which the star also shares writing and producing credit. Seemingly designed to facilitate mall marketing and retail tie-ins, the movie itself has only one consistent strategy -- namely, capitalizing on James' adeptness at hurling his sizable bulk around. It is, pardon the expression, an extremely slim approach, which should yield quickly diminishing returns after a more solid opening than most actual malls are seeing in this economy.
Having successfully made the comic-to-actor transition on the sitcom "The King of Queens," James possesses an inherent sweetness and an amiable-lug quality. Along with his penchant for pratfalls, there are hints of the late Jackie Gleason in him -- though with efforts like "Mall Cop," any similarities will pretty much end there.
Directed by Steve Carr ("Daddy Day Care"), the movie is so shoddily edited that there are glaring gaps in the action, including a chase sequence that begins within the mall and suddenly, inexplicably, winds up on the roof. The same goes for a left-field twist involving the protagonist's daughter, just to name a few of the "Huh?" moments, as if somebody decided trimming the fat was the only way to make this food-court flotsam palatable.
The premise ostensibly hopes to spoof "Die Hard," with rejected state trooper applicant-turned-security guard Paul Blart (James) as the "man on the inside," forced to defend a New Jersey mall after high-tech thieves have seized control. While Paul tools around on a Segway, the thieves navigate the shopping center on skateboards for no particular reason other than the fact that 12-year-olds -- who clearly represent the target audience of this PG-rated endeavor -- tend to like them.
A divorced dad who takes the expression "comfort food" to extremes that include slathering peanut butter on pie, Paul has set his eye on Amy (Jayma Mays, carving out an odd niche as the object of nerd affection, having played a similar role on "Heroes"), who staffs one of the mall kiosks. Naturally, she's among the hostages taken, prompting Paul to seek creative ways to thwart the bad guys, who, fortunately, appear to have guns only when they have no opportunity to shoot at him.
Although produced by Sandler's company, the project appears to have been made on a budget of the big-box-store variety. Still, even given the movie's modest ambitions, it's surprising to see a studio release in which details like continuity and coherence are such a conspicuous afterthought.
James still has potential as the kind of unorthodox leading man who resembles a sizable portion of America, and he has mastered a hangdog expression that makes him easy to root for. Enduring "Mall Cop," though, only brings to mind the depressing scenario currently playing out in malls all over: Even with cut-rate goods at discount prices, the answer's no sale.
