         Published in 1985, Patrick Süskind's novel "Perfume: The Story of a Murderer" was the unaccountably compelling story of a boy born into the smelliest time and place in history (Paris, 1783, naturellement
) with a superhuman olfactory sense but no personal scent. The boy grows up to be the most gifted perfumer who ever lived, and a serial murderer. In part a parable about the mysteries of human affection, "Perfume" turned out to be wildly pheromonal itself. It was translated in 45 languages and sold 15 million copies worldwide. Besotted directors from Stanley Kubrick to Tim Burton flocked to it, Kurt Cobain wrote a song about it, and producer Bernd Eichinger, a friend of the novelist, tried so doggedly for so long to purchase the film rights that Süskind, who was adamant his book not be turned into a film, wrote a play about it.
 
 
 FOR THE RECORD:



         






    "Perfume": The review in of "Perfume: The Story of a Murderer" in Wednesday's Calendar section described the movie's story as set in Paris, 1783, then referred to that period as the 16th century. It should have said the 18th century. —
 

 
  Eventually, Süskind relented and Eichinger succeeded. "Perfume: The Story of a Murderer" went to director Tom Tykwer ("Run Lola Run") and screenwriter Andrew Birkin ("The Cement Garden"), who have faithfully adapted the plot but willfully missed the point of the story. Tykwer captures Süskind's vividly rendered 16th century gutter Paris exhilaratingly well. In the city market, the camera becomes a truffle pig, isolating odors and frantically rooting them out with its snout, vividly bringing to life the foulest, most fulsomely stinky place you've ever seen. But in rebuilding the protagonist to make him more sympathetic to movie audiences, he and Birkin underplay the very elements that gave him tragic dimension. The monster of the book, a freak of nature and nurture whose singular biological quirk makes him a pariah, becomes a handsome cipher in the film; teased for his obsession with the olfactory world but not universally despised for lacking what could be interpreted as a soul. So it goes in movie-land, but it's one thing to make an intellectual novel cinematic and another entirely to play dumb.
 
  Jean-Baptiste Grenouille (the name means "frog" in French, though in the film he is played by the much too handsome, not-remotely-amphibian Ben Whishaw) comes into the world under a stall at Les Halles market. Under different circumstances, his mother might have been called a fishwife, but as there is no fish-husband in the picture, and she's birthed several unwanted bastards before Jean-Baptiste and left them all to die in a soup of blood, guts and maggots, she's probably more accurately described as a fish tramp. This time, the wailing baby is discovered, his mother is sent to the gallows for attempted murder and Jean-Baptiste is sold to an orphanage, then to a tanning factory, then, when he demonstrates an olfactory ability that surpasses normal human ability by a mile, to a perfumer, who teaches him his trade. By the time Grenouille embarks on his new life as a fragrance genius, he has killed a young girl and will kill many more. But we don't have an idea of what he's really after.
 
  Much was made of the difficulty of bringing the novel's vivid aromas to the screen. But that appears to have worked out fine. What's missing is less a sense of the protagonist's inner nose (which is very well-trammeled) as a sense of his inner life, motivation or desire. And as much as it's in many ways a visual pleasure, tonally, the movie is a mess. Whishaw plays Grenouille like a kind of noble savage rather than the amoral genius he is. Dustin Hoffman's portrayal of the fading celebrity perfumer is disconcertingly kitsch and over the top, a buffoonish interlude in what is essentially a dark, mordant story about a killer who manipulates the unaware and ignorant masses into recognizing him as a messiah.
 
  Instead, we get a confused love story of sorts, in which the aristocratic virgin Laura Richis (Rachel Hurd-Wood) becomes the ultimate object of longing. No wonder her father, played by Alan Rickman in perma-scowl, spends the movie circling like an Australian sheepdog. This is not entirely surprising, considering how much time the movie spends contemplating her loveliness. Ultimately, though, her loveliness doesn't have much to say for itself, and the story's mordant climax, stylish as it is, doesn't resonate. The shame is that as a story about a monster, it had a lot to say about humanity. As a story about a guy with a passion for virgin scents, it really doesn't say anything at all.
 
 
  "Perfume: The Story of a Murderer." MPAA rating: R for aberrant behavior involving nudity, violence, sexuality, and disturbing images. Running time: 2 hours, 27 minutes. Exclusively at Pacific's ArcLight, 6360 W. Sunset Blvd. (at Ivar Avenue), Hollywood, (323) 464-4226.   


The seductive, sensory prose of Patrick Suskind's bestseller, "Perfume," reaches the screen with loads of visual panache but only intermittent magic in producer Bernd Eichinger and helmer Tom Tykwer's long-awaited pic version. In many respects, it's too
 faithful to the 1985 novel: an almost impossible to adapt reportage-cum-reverie, written from an ironic modern viewpoint, about an 18th century Parisian orphan who turns mass murderer in search of the perfect scent, Love. Euro big-budgeter, shot in English on a reported tab of E50 million ($63.7 million), has a readymade fan base, especially in Europe, among the book's 15 million readers but is more high-end fare in Anglo markets.
Released Sept. 14 in Germany, where it's well on its way to hitting a hunky 3 million admissions in its first month, pic has already started its three-month rollout across most of the rest of Europe. First test in an Anglophone territory will be Blighty on Dec. 8; Stateside release is skedded for Dec. 27.
Suskind, a reclusive Munich writer, refused to sell the screen rights for many years, finally yielding to Eichinger's repeated requests in 2001. (In the meantime, Suskind had co-written the superb ensembler "Rossini," which Eichinger's Constantin Film distribbed in 1997.) British writer-director Andrew Birkin worked first with Eichinger on the script, and they were then joined by Tykwer ("Run Lola Run"), who finally took over the helming reins.
Tykwer seems the ideal choice, having shown a grasp for contempo magic realism and highly metaphysical material in earlier pics like Expressionistic psychothriller "Deadly Maria" (1993) and Cate Blanchett starrer "Heaven" (2002), Tykwer's most recent feature. Problem with "Perfume" is not so much how to make the audience identify with a largely silent, olfactory-obsessed nerd who turns serial killer, but how to transmit his compulsion in the strictly audiovisual medium of film. (AromaRama and Smell-O-Vision, which dispensed odors into theaters, died a quick death in 1959-60.)
Tykwer's early solution -- paralleling Suskind's stench-heavy opening prose -- is to lay on the visual grunge of 18th century Paris. After an opening, in 1766, showing Jean-Baptiste Grenouille (Ben Whishaw) being led to hear his death sentence read to a braying crowd, pic flashes back 22 years. We see his birth in a stinking fish market, his childhood in an orphanage run by the money-grabbing Mme. Gaillard (Sian Thomas) and his apprenticeship in a filthy tannery under thug-with-boils Grimal (Sam Douglas).
Parallel with this visual onslaught, an offscreen narrator (an excellent John Hurt in the English version; veteran thesp Otto Sander in German prints) preserves some of Suskind's irony as he describes Grenouille's growing obsession with "the fleeting world of scent." His olfactory sense becomes so highly tuned that it nullifies all other human qualities, including love, compassion and personal communication.
More than just a killer-thriller or the tale of a man with an exceptional gift, "Perfume" is a skewed love story, of a man who suddenly discovers the "scent of woman" but can't make the jump into real relationships.
Wandering in nighttime Paris, Grenouille catches the scent of a young woman selling plums (Karoline Herfurth). Almost accidentally, he strangles her, and then, in one of the film's most powerful sequences, tries to preserve her bodily scent in his memory by sniffing her naked corpse.
Grenouille's opportunity to develop his obsession comes in the form of onetime successful parfumier Giuseppe Baldini (Dustin Hoffman), whom he persuades to take him on as an apprentice.
When Grenouille discovers that human scent can't be bottled, he sets out on his own to Provence, in southern France -- to the town of Grasse, which specializes in enfleurage
, extracting the essence of flowers. Joining a firm run by Mme. Arnulfi (German thesp Corinna Harfouch), and becoming obsessed by the virginal scent of local beauty Laura (newcomer Rachel Hurd-Wood), daughter of widowed merchant Antoine Richis (Alan Rickman), he turns to mass murder to produce the ultimate femme-scent cocktail.
Apart from scissoring an episode set in Montpellier, script is extremely faithful to Suskind's book -- indeed, more liberties should have been taken to make the novel work on the screen. During its first hour, prior to Provence, film is entertaining on a visual level, with Uli Hanisch's extraordinary production design and Pierre-Yves Gayraud's lived-in costumes giving a real feel for 18th century Paris without too much exaggeration.
But with far too big a chunk of screentime given to Hoffman's unconvincing perf as the charlatan Baldini, pic is slow moving . Despite Hurt's toney voiceover, and all the shots of Grenouille's twitching nose and talk of scent manufacture, there's a limit to how well any film can convey the protag's sensory dilemma.
Film really gets under way in the Grasse half, with the brighter, more colorful vistas, and Grenouille finally deciding to show the world he's not a nobody. With Rickman proving a classy combatant as a father seeking to protect his only child, picture starts to grip in human terms. Only during the yarn's final segment, which plays OK in the book but looks daft onscreen, does "Perfume" really lose its bouquet.
Major kudos go to 25-year-old Whishaw, recently seen as Keith Richards in "Stoned," for his half-angel, half-devil perf as Grenouille, a difficult role into which the young British thesp throws himself with conviction. Among the many fine supports, Harfouch seems shortchanged in a part that seems to have suffered from cuts.
Though it may offend enthusiasts of the original, tightening throughout by some 20 minutes would improve the movie dramatically. But even in its present form, pic is still, like the novel, an extraordinarily brave, challenging piece of work. If Tykwer & Co. had cut loose a bit more, and gone for the heart rather than the intellect, "Perfume" could have been a fragrant treat indeed.

A multimillion-euro adaptation of a bestselling German novel, Perfume: The Story of a Murderer  relates the life of Jean-Baptiste Grenouille  (Ben Whishaw ), born in 18th-century Paris with a uniquely puissant sense of smell. He begins life as an orphan, sold into servitude to a brutal tanner, but in Toucan Sam  fashion follows his nose into the rarefied world of perfumers, where his superhuman gift proves highly valuable. However, Grenouille has little interest in financial reward. After a brief yet intense infatuation with the bodily smell of a comely fruitmonger leads to her sudden death, Grenouille becomes obsessed with discovering the means to create a permanent record of an individual's scent and to concoct the ultimate "scent of all things," the most powerful perfume possible.
The pungent plot may sound preposterous, and indeed it's hard not to snicker early on, when Grenouille is introduced as a mere nose hanging in darkness, his inner life revealed via a digital zoom up his nostril. When the action shifts to the vial-clinking realm of perfumeries, the film is filled with slightly ludicrous close-ups of dainty noses sniffing at the air, followed by orgasmic coos of feminine delight. A face-powdered Dustin Hoffman  plays Grenouille's mentor, the once legendary but now moribund perfumer Giuseppe Baldini ; one wonders whether the casting hinged on the actor's near legendary schnozz, since his Methodish grumbling through stilted Augustan diction plays against the straight-faced classical training of the otherwise British cast.
Perfume is easily the most nasally fixated movie to hit theaters since John Waters  distributed "Odorama" scratch-and-sniff cards for Polyester , but here the olfactory theme is pursued with costumed gravitas and whispered awe. Despite dealing a few unintentionally silly moments, director Tom Tykwer  (best known for the rave-era novelty Run, Lola, Run ) avoids whimsy, opting instead for a dead-serious brand of magic realism.
The film's most intriguing and successful aspect is its attempt to depict what its narrator (gravel-voiced John Hurt ) calls "the fleeting world of scent" through audio and images. Cinema, as Siegfried Kracauer  put it, is pure externality, and smell is an internal sensation with a physical kick. Tykwer attempts to convey smell synesthetically, evoking the missing sense with fleshy sights and sounds. Grenouille's genesis in a fish market is filled with sloppy squishes and bloody halibut heads, and his super-snoot allows him to discern the components of everyday air, depicted in quick mental flashes as he catalogs each distinctive aroma. When the young lad discovers the pleasures of woman, it is through his prodding proboscis, which he gently snuffles up and down one lady's naked corpus.
But Perfume 's hyper-fragrant world strives beyond mere physical sensuality toward a spiritual erotic. Indeed, Baldini explains the legend of an ancient perfume, discovered in an Egyptian tomb, whose intoxicating qualities caused millions to see paradise. And Grenouille's eventual devolution into serial killer arrives not so much as a consequence of his sniffling animality, but as an extension of his Proustian quest for the lost scent of his first love, which he pursues with a series of experiments on human bodies. Once he discovers the secret, the perfume is so powerful that others think he is an angel; Tykwer expresses the intensity of its efflorescence through cascades of golden light and spine-shivering drones of Dolby  bass-boom.
It's a noble experiment in pushing the limits of cinema, but Tykwer never achieves true profundity. Despite the fixation on depicting interior experience, the film's characters are mere storybook ciphers, and the film's final third moves perfunctorily through the murders touted in its title. The attempts at synesthesia never quite reach the empyrean heights we are supposed to imagine. One too many sequences of ruffling silks and dreamy flower bouquets evoke little more than the ad-agency clichés of an elongated Chanel No. 5  commercial.
