 A contemporary Manhattan romance gets the muddled-timeline treatment in “Peter and Vandy,” a sweet but unsatisfying tale of loving and leaving.  Written and directed by Jay DiPietro (adapting his 2002 play of the same name), the film opens as Vandy (Jess Weixler), an art gallery employee, is expressing her postcoital love for Peter (Jason Ritter), a terminally insecure architect. From there, a series of out-of-sequence encounters establishes the peaks and valleys of their relationship, an agonizingly hesitant affair distinguished by her passive aggression and his occasionally abusive neuroses.  Lovely to look at (Frank G. DeMarco’s photography gives even the chilly New York City exteriors a romantic sheen) and beautifully acted, “Peter and Vandy” is often charming but also strenuous. The nonlinear structure (reminiscent of the recent “(500) Days of Summer”) and unrevealing dialogue too often hold us at arm’s length, a puzzle to be solved without sufficient clues. When, briefly, the film opens up to embrace a second bickering couple (elegantly played by Tracie Thoms and Jesse L. Martin), the rush of energy is palpable: here at last are people willing to communicate in clear, declarative sentences.  Enriched by a soundtrack heavy with New York-based talent like the National and Animal Collective, “Peter and Vandy” is more a designer frame for actors than nourishing entertainment. Like the Chinese food the leads are always arguing over, the story leaves you hungry for more.

A time-jumbling love story about a couple who never inspire rooting interest, "Peter and Vandy" is an aggravating romance that runs only 78 minutes but ends not a moment too soon. First-time director Jay DiPietro has opened up his own two-character play, which enjoyed a four-month run in New York in 2002, to encompass numerous additional characters and locations, but this doesn't change the fact that the lead characters never say anything interesting or insightful, are always bickering about mundane things such as where or what to eat, and in every way seem unworthy of any audience's attention. Theatrical possibilities are virtually nil.
Jason Ritter blandly plays Peter, an energetic young New Yorker with the incredibly annoying habit of apologizing for practically everything he does and says. His girlfriend Vandy (Jess Weixler, "Teeth") gingerly points out this fault to him, but he never improves. Some of the linear deck-shuffling creates small frissons, but there's no underlying tension or subtext to shore up the banal talk. The accompanying songs are innocuous.
Camera (color), Frank G. DeMarco; editor, Geoffrey Richman; music supervisor, Stephanie Diaz-Matos; production designer, Lucio Seixas; costume designer, David Withrow. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 22, 2009. Running time: 78 MIN.
 


Middlebrow Sundance product is the scourge of American independent cinema today—those innocuously "arty," totally commercial, and barely-left-of-mainstream films that trick the masses into feeling smarter and edgier than deserved (see: Little  Miss Sunshine , Juno , and dozens of titles aiming to be both). Jay DiPietro's modest directorial debut, Peter and Vandy , is at least impassioned, but if the film hadn't been adapted from his 2002 play about a strained romance chronicled out of temporal sequence, we'd dismiss it as a cut-rate (500) Days of Summer —itself a cut-rate example of the aforementioned fest genre. Temperamental and passive-aggressively inarticulate, downtown NYC twentysomethings Peter (Jason Ritter) and Vandy (Jess Weixler) confess their love, cruelly project their insecurities during inane fights over how to make a PB&J sandwich, meet for the first time, and on and on through the back-and-forth span of their relationship. Ritter and Weixler do share an easy-at-being-uneasy chemistry, mostly because his performance is downright distinguished compared to her blandness, but DiPietro's screenplay is emotionally myopic. His sharpest written exchanges—and there aren't many—get buried under his inexplicable need to embrace the non-linear conceit. Did we mention there's indie rock?
