 Cara-Ethyl (Kylie Sparks) is unpopular and overweight, but as she's a character in an American independent movie, she is also vivacious and quirky. No one has shown up for her 18th-birthday party, so she busies herself scooping chunks of chocolate cake with a finger and pretending to talk to a girlfriend for the benefit of her mother (Julie Hagerty), recently blinded in a freak doughnut frying accident.  Enter Matt (Ethan Embry), a pizza delivery dude with puppy dog eyes and a handful of pepperoni pies. Before you can say "we should have ordered Chinese," this soulful slacker absconds with the birthday girl for a night of misadventure and carpe diem clichés.  Written and directed by Mark Christopher ("54"), "Pizza" is a thin slice of flavorless whimsy heavily garnished with contrivance. As Cara-Ethyl and Matt inexplicably bond - bad writing can bring anyone together - one phony situation follows another: couch time with grungy roommates; deliveries to assorted oddballs; nightclub follies; humiliation at a make-out party. The tone is half mocking, half forthright and completely boring.  Less egregious than simply unnecessary, this least enlightening of movies nevertheless delivers a bittersweet lesson. Compare it with 2003's brooding "Crimson Gold," another pizza-themed opus about a fat outcast, and "Pizza" reveals how stale the ambitions of so much homegrown filmmaking have become.

Like Hawaiian pie, indie comedy "Pizza" is not for all palates, but it's laced with enough tasty ingredients to sustain a following. Scribe/helmer Mark Christopher has crafted a bittersweet, persuasively acted comedy whose tone recalls '80s teen films. Although it has some predictably formulaic elements, pic overall feels too quirkily offbeat (and its cast too far below the radar) to snag a high-profile distribution deal like Christopher's Miramax-diffused "54." Having already been released overseas, "Pizza" will presumably find a delivery service to place it on arthouse menus and -- with decent promotion -- on homevideo shelves, where it should fare even better.
Plus-sized high schooler Cara-Ethyl (Kylie Sparks), an aspiring actress, is depressed and alone on her 18th birthday. Desperate to convince her mother (Julie Hagerty) -- temporarily blinded in a baking accident -- that she's not a pariah, Cara-Ethyl invents and impersonates the guests at her own party.
When handsome and surprisingly articulate pizza man Matt (Ethan Embry) arrives, Cara-Ethyl instantly falls for his low-key charm and thirtysomething intelligence. Though Cara-Ethyl is intermittently grating -- she's a weird blend of vulnerable and brassy, like her namesakes Irene Cara and Ethel Merman -- Matt graciously invites her along on his delivery route.
Through a gamut of pizza deliveries and some misguided adventures, the unlikely duo forges a friendship. The sheltered Cara-Ethyl is exposed to a culture she had only known through books and movies, a world that involves sexually aggressive roommates, drug-snorting teenagers, and imperious pizza bosses. And Matt, for his part, learns a thing or two about himself.
Ironically, some of "Pizza's" best elements are also its weakest. While its themes are poignant and universal -- no one wants to feel like a misfit; everyone needs a friend -- they're piled on so heavily that they go down like a stale slice. What makes the movie fresh are the performances from newcomer Sparks and Embry (TV's "Dragnet"), each of whom breathes new life into what might have been the stereotypical parts of fat girl and hunk.
Christopher has an ear for dialogue, and when he's more preoccupied with the rhythm of his characters' banter than the ponderous significance of his movie's message, "Pizza" is a relatively appetizing plate.
Camera (color), Ken Ferris; editors, Michelle Botticelli, Brian A. Kates; music, John Kimbrough; production designer, Charlotte Burke; art director, Laura Hyman; sound, William Cozy, Joshua Anderson; casting, Susie Farris. Reviewed at Palm Springs Film Festival (World Cinema Now), Jan. 15, 2005. Running time: 93 MIN.
 


An ugly-duckling fable populated with grotesques out of John Waters , Pizza  attempts an unlikely mode: earnest camp. Obese, bespectacled, and painfully sure of herself, Cara-Ethyl (Kylie Sparks ) is a kindred spirit to Todd Solondz 's Dawn Wiener , plus a helium voice and minus self-consciousness. Every phrase she utters seems deliberately mangled. She's turning 18 "at the cock's crow," but naturally, only her imaginary friend has shown up to the party. Out of the blue, a pizza deliveryman (Ethan Embry ) invites Cara-Ethyl to ride shotgun on his rounds. Is this guy a pedophile? A saint? An all-around cool dude with time to spare and a van to show off? Their trip constitutes a cross section of suburbia as previously conceived by Lynch, K. Smith, and Gallo: slovenly roommates, a handicapped Irishwoman, an unbalanced drama teacher, and the local Heathers—none served well by the slapdash DV, perhaps director Mark Christopher 's penance for the disco glitz of 54 . What all this mannered jabbering adds up to is unclear, though one inarguable moral is that pizza tastes good. Forget 30-minute delivery—this brand of indie quirkiness congealed in the late '90s.
