Shut up or die : It's the tagline of Ontario auteur Bruce McDonald's crazy-cool, low-budget horror flick for a reason. This one-of-a-kind zombie film, named for the provincial Canadian town in which it's set, stars Stephen McHattie as a cantankerous radio shock-jock broadcasting out of a crummy church basement, who fights back when zombies attack on a snowstormy Valentine's Day. The means of infection? Tainted language! Think of this witty, economically gory little tour de force as 28 Days Later  written by  linguist Noam Chomsky. Pontypool  is the perfect antidote to swine flu hysteria. (Available on cable via on demand )

 “Pontypool,” a small Canadian horror film that makes the most of its minuscule budget, is set almost entirely in the confines of a tiny radio station that operates from a church basement in rural Ontario. (The film’s title is also the name of the village that is home to the station, CLSY Radio.) Here, Grant Mazzy (Stephen McHattie), a growling talk-show cowboy who suggests a bottom-drawer Don Imus, holds forth each morning while swigging heavily spiked coffee. By his side are his producer, Sydney Briar (Lisa Houle), with whom he continually bickers, and Laurel Ann Drummond (Georgina Reilly), a resourceful technician who recently returned from serving in Afghanistan.  Directed by Bruce McDonald (“The Tracey Fragments”) from Tony Burgess’s screen adaptation of his novel “Pontypool Changes Everything,” the film captures the monotonous daily rituals of broadcasting from inside a studio that feels so sealed off from the outside world that nothing beyond the sound booth seems real. On this snowy Valentine’s Day morning, phoned-in reports of grisly events in the town seem as bogus as the Sunshine Chopper, a fictional traffic helicopter that is actually a truck parked on a hill.  The traffic reporter, Ken Loney (Rick Roberts), gives increasingly agitated eyewitness accounts of a mob surrounding the house of a local doctor, on top of another report of demented ice fishermen cannibalizing policemen. Because he is just a voice and never seen, they sound like an elaborate prank.  The first half of “Pontypool,” with its mixture of high-velocity banter and news flashes, suggests a deadpan spoof of “War of the Worlds,” Orson Welles’s notorious 1938 mock newscast describing a Martian invasion of New Jersey. But soon enough, the horror outside CLSY closes in on the station, and a zombielike mob arrives and begins banging on the windows.  “Pontypool” eventually makes a giant satiric leap into intellectual pretension, transforming William S. Burroughs’s notion that language is a virus into flesh-eating reality. The virus is not just any language, but English, the contagion spread through terms of endearment. To survive, Grant is forced to speak in broken French.  “Pontypool” barely develops a premise that has all kinds of implications about the mass media (talk radio in particular) and the degradation of language in a culture overrun with hyperbole, jargon, disinformation and contrived drama. But when one infected character is reduced to spouting gibberish as she suicidally hurls herself at the glass booth that has become a fortress against the zombie terror, the notion that we are all being driven mad by an incessant verbal deluge makes nasty comic sense.

However shrewdly contrived to keep its budget low, "Pontypool," set almost entirely in a basement radio station, is a zombie flick sans bite. Nearly an hour passes before yet another familiar slew of flesh-seeking ghouls penetrate the walls of small-town Ontario's CLSY-AM -- and, alas, go home hungry (not unlike auds). Would-be horror pic's failure to deliver even mildly on generic conventions while talking itself to death -- this in a film about the viral dangers of language -- will be mistaken by some for subversion, natch, but "Pontypool" won't make the slightest B.O. ripple regardless.
With Stephen McHattie as a cowboyish deejay better suited to an '80s-era John Carpenter film, veteran Canuck helmer Bruce McDonald ("The Tracey Fragments") assumes rather than cultivates the viewer's interest in a possible deadly outbreak. Freaked-out listeners call in with vague reports of horrific activity in the titular town -- enough to inspire countless shudders from the host's producer (Lisa Houle) and young assistant (Georgina Reilly), but not nearly enough to sustain a full-length feature. Zombie subgenre's sociopolitical import is squandered here, give or take a pretentious talk about the power of speech. Tech credits are OK.
Camera (color/B&W, HD, widescreen), Mirolsaw Baszak; editor, Jeremiah Munce; music, Claude Foisy; production designer, Lea Carlson; art director, Andrew Berry; costume designer, Sarah Armstrong. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Vanguard), Sept. 6, 2008. Running time: 96 MIN.
 


"Language is a virus from outer space," William S. Burroughs once wrote. In Bruce McDonald's dull zombie movie (written by Tony Burgess, adapting his 1998 novel, Pontypool Changes Everything ), the disease originates in the far less exotic Ontario hamlet of the title. Grant Mazzy (Stephen McHattie), a grizzled DJ, and his two production assistants, Sydney and Laurel Ann (Lisa Houle and Georgina Reilly), start their morning show with weird reports of riots and cannibalism. In the officially bilingual Great White North, the English language is infected, causing Afghan war vet Laurel Ann to bleed from the mouth and hordes of zombie Canucks to descend upon the church-basement radio station as Grant and Sydney speak such horrible Franglish that surely the Bloc Québécois would do them in before the flesh-eaters. For a film about the perils of too much talk, there's quite a lot of babbling presented as profundity. The political statements in Pontypool, much like those in another recent Canadian offering, Atom Egoyan's trite terrorism hand-wringer Adoration, seem all the less provocative for appearing several years too late—McDonald's film might have had more punch if it were released when Bluetooth first rolled out.
