         It's too bad that in "Poster Boy" clarity is not equal to force, because it has so much going for it. It's topical, impassioned and dynamic, boasting crisp performances and smart dialogue. Its convoluted flashback structure and elliptical style make it at times needlessly confusing to the point of distraction, which likely will limit its appeal to gay audiences in a forgiving mood. This is lamentable because, more so than most gay-themed movies, "Poster Boy" had the potential for crossover appeal.
 
  Fictional right-wing North Carolina Sen. Jack Kray (Michael Lerner, never scarier) is gearing up for his next campaign and insists that his own college student son Henry (Matt Newton) serve as his "poster boy" to attract younger voters. What the senator does not know is that his son is gay, and when Henry resists participating in the campaign, despite his father's bullying, he is threatened with being outed by the senator's smarmy aide (Ian Reed Kesler).
 


         






    Intelligent and reflective as well as rebellious, Henry observes that his father is as addicted to politics as a junkie is to heroin. Jack Kray is a phony beneath a publicly folksy family values veneer, a ruthless bully who believes in nothing but winning at whatever cost. His attractive wife, Eunice (Karen Allen), cast her lot with her husband long ago, and when she finally does allow herself to express her dismay over his tactics, he airily dismisses her by telling her to take a drink or go shopping.
 
  In the meantime, while miserably bending to his father's will, Henry, at his college in New York, meets the charismatic Anthony (Jack Noseworthy). They commence an affair, with Henry unaware that Anthony is a political activist determined to bring down the senator.
 
  Director Zak Tucker, in his first feature, stirs up his actors without pushing them over the top, but the film's problem is the lack of connective tissue provided by writers Lecia Rosenthal and Ryan Shiraki, who are stronger on characterization than continuity. Valerie Geffner, an actress of commanding presence, is wasted in an ill-defined role as Anthony's best friend. Even with satisfying performances from the principal actors, however, "Poster Boy" is longer on energy than focus.
 
 
'Poster Boy'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, some sexual content/nudity
 
 Distributed by Regent Releasing. Director Zak Tucker. Producers Jeff Campagna, Rebecca Chaiklin, Dolly Hall, Vince P. Maggio, Herbert Ross. Screenplay by Lecia Rosenthal and Ryan Shiraki. Cinematograp   


Coming during a period in which the collision of politics and gay rights has created perhaps unprecedented sparks, "Poster Boy" is a flawed but absorbing drama about a right-wing U.S. senator campaigning for re-election and the gay son at odds with his father's narrow views. Underproduced and compromised by an uneven script and a tendency to descend into melodrama, the DV-lensed feature nonetheless is well acted and directed with confidence by first-timer Zak Tucker. Blowup to 35mm and less frugal use of music could bolster niche theatrical potential before a more robust outing on DVD.
Troubled project originally was slated for late director Herbert Ross -- to whom the film is dedicated -- with Billy Crudup in the key role. When that failed to materialize, Douglas Keeve ("Unzipped") signed on to direct a more modestly reconfigured production. He departed early in the shoot, leaving then-editor Tucker to graduate to directing.
Known variously as "the Nazi from North Carolina" or "Mr. Family Values," Senator Jack Kray (Michael Lerner) seeks to harness the elusive youth vote by enlisting his handsome son Henry (Matt Newton) to introduce him at a rally at theNew York State college the young man attends.
Henry, however, is a sexually active gay man who has never come out to his parents. Despite Henry's vigorous objections and the less forceful ones of his jaded mother, Eunice (Karen Allen), Jack insists his son should be a visible part of his campaign.
Henry flees to the family's Palm Springs house, but Eunice sends eager young Republican Skip (Ian Reed Kesler) to retrieve him. Back at college, Henry hooks up at a party with Anthony (Jack Noseworthy), a young activist from off-campus, who refuses to observe Henry's strict one-night-only policy. Anthony persists with him the following day, while liberal agitators post six-degrees-of-penetration charts all over the campus, linking Henry sexually to various guys.
When Jack and Eunice arrive on campus with their entourage, the emotional stakes are upped further by the unpredictable presence of Anthony's volatile, HIV-positive roommate Izzie (Valerie Geffner).
Screenwriters Ryan Shiraki and Lecia Rosenthal adopt the cumbersome framing device of a post-election newspaper interview with Henry. The action cuts to the interview repeatedly, creating halting momentum and laboring the political agenda.
But despite some overwrought confrontations, the drama remains interesting and its characters intriguingly complex.
Lerner sinks his teeth into a borderline caricature role as the self-righteous bully. Allen is especially good as the neglected wife he refers to as "my rightest wing," a sympathetic woman who "takes the bones with the fish," numbed into a meaningless life of drinking, chain-smoking, shopping and providing purely decorative support. Newton, Noseworthy and Geffner all do the job.
While initial involvement is slowed by the fragmented storytelling style, Tucker eventually gets a firmer handle on the drama, with the jumpy editing and nervy handheld shooting style providing additional texture.
Camera (color, DV), Wolfgang Held; editors, Pamela Scott Arnold, Tucker, Trevor Ristow; music, Mark Garcia; music supervisor, Jim Black; production/costume designer, Doug Hall; art director, Miguel Alvarez; sound, Dan Ferat; line producer, Caroline Jaczko; assistant director, Julie Noll; casting, Billy Hopkins, Suzanne Smith, Kerry Barden. Reviewed at Tribeca Screening Room, April 22, 2004. (In Tribeca Film Festival -- competing.) Running time: 98 MIN.

 


Henry Kray  is a gay student at a fictional private college in New York. His freedom to be as miserably self-involved and openly sexually active as his peers is curtailed by his father's position: Republican senator from North Carolina. When the senator asks his son to step up to the campaign podium on his behalf, the closeted Henry has a crisis of conscience, and his father's PR charade begins to break down. Poster Boy 's frame, in which Henry spills the details of the scandal to a self-interested reporter, reeks of contrivance. And the drama that fills the flashbacks is painfully hyperbolized. Despite the screenwriters' attempts to make him sympathetic, Henry is surly and coy, so we don't care whether he escapes his father's heartless machine. Rather than creating believable characters engaged in nuanced conflict, Boy  proffers a pair of obvious symbols and hopes that they'll make a statement about the personal and the political.
