 We Americans may be fond of conspiracy theories, but on screen they tend to seem overdone and implausible. The elaborate webs of intrigue that sustain most political thrillers usually offer too much speculation and too little insight, and are in any case diversions from reality rather than attempts to engage it. "The President's Last Bang," a tight, sober and strangely comical new film from South Korea, tells a tale that may sound far-fetched, but that is all the more crazy for being true.  On the night of Oct. 26, 1979, President Park Chung Hee, whose authoritarian rule had lasted for most of two decades, was shot to death by the head of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency. Though the assassination came in the wake of student protests and pro-democracy agitation, the killer's political motives have remained a bit opaque. Im Sangsoo,  who wrote and directed the film, declines to illuminate them, presenting the events of the night in a detached, procedural manner that leaves ample room for psychological rumination. Baik  Yoonshik   who plays Kim Jae Kyu,  the K.C.I.A. director, has a haggard, melancholy face that suggests a weary stoicism. His main fellow conspirator, a young, gum-chewing agent named Ju (Han Sukgyu)  seems to be motivated by a mixture of loyalty to his boss and restless ambition, though for what is not entirely clear.  The film moves deliberately, taking in various  points of view, including those of two young women, a student and a folk singer (Cho Eunji  and Kim  Yoonah), who have been recruited to spend the evening with the president, whose womanizing habits are established in a very funny early scene. He seems more like a mob boss than a head of state, which is probably Mr. Im's point. "The President's Last Bang" depicts a closed, secretive world of power and protocol, at once elaborately punctilious and floridly corrupt.  The concentric, competing inner circles of power - the intelligence establishment, the military, the president's bodyguard - seem to exist in an environment hermetically sealed off from the country they are supposed to lead. Nearly all  the film's action takes place at night, in a cordoned-off safe house, and the final scenes lead us on a surreal tour of Seoul's huge, empty government buildings, which resemble nothing so much as remote space stations in a science-fiction movie.  It is hard for an outsider to parse Mr. Im's intentions in revisiting this traumatic moment in his nation's authoritarian past. The mood of his film, which provoked some controversy when it was released in Korea (where it was nonetheless a hit) is neither angry nor nostalgic, but clinical and perhaps also a bit cynical. Nobody wins in this bloody game, and heroism and villainy coexist along a narrow spectrum of behavior. And yet this kind of cynicism also feels like the prerogative of a democratic sensibility, which can peer into the highest sanctum of power and see the same messy, ignoble human behavior that exists everywhere else.

South Korean cinema finally gets its first full-blown political satire with "The President's Last Bang," a virtuoso slice of sustained black humor centered on the real-life 1979 assassination of Gen. Park Chung-heui by his secret service chief. Imagine a ramped-down, Korean version of "Dr. Strangelove," and you're not far from the satirical tone of this fourth feature by writer-director Im Sang-soo ("A Good Lawyer's Wife"). Though some recognition of the actors involved and some knowledge of recent Korean history enrich the viewing experience, pic could find a specialized market in the West among simpatico upscale auds.
Film caused a major hoo-ha on local release Feb. 3, with Park's family (including his daughter, current head of the center-right opposition party) getting a court judgment to excise use of documentary footage at the start (anti-government protests of the time) and end (Park's funeral).
Claim was that audiences could be confused by the mix of fiction and reality. Final B.O., amid some strong competition from other local pics, was a solid but not spectacular 1 million admissions.
In place of the deleted opening footage, international version starts with brief on-screen backgrounding explaining that Park came to power in 1961 and ruled for 18 years with near-dictatorial powers, and how, in October 1979, student and worker demonstrations were crushed by the military.
Film proper kicks off on the day in question, Oct. 26, 1979, with all the protags succinctly introduced. There's head KCIA agent Ju (local star Han Seok-gyu), a grinning, gum-chewing bully shown terrifying a hooker and her mother; chronically weary KCIA chief Kim (Baek Yun-shik), whose doctor tells him his liver is almost kaput; the prez's oily chief secretary, Yang (Gweon Byeong-gil); and fat, pompous chief bodyguard, Cha (Jeong Weon-jung).
Park decides his evening's entertainment is to be with his favorite popular singer, Miss Shim (Kim Yun-ah) -- modeled, with a name-change, on a real chanteuse who was present that evening -- and brassy goodtime girl Miss Jo (Jo Eun-ji). Park's un-PC fondness for Japanese songs, and even speaking occasionally in Japanese, is a sly dig which may escape most Western auds.
After the KCIA brass has hurriedly arranged a dinner at a sprawling manse that doubles as a KCIA safe house, Kim, Cha and Yang arrive with the women -- and a retinue of bodyguards -- for an evening's private entertainment of song, food and drink. Proceedings kick off with the prez lecturing his guests on "discipline," his hatred of democracy (and especially U.S. President Carter) and how the KCIA should crack down harder on dissent.
Pic's sardonic tone has gradually increased under all this activity, with KCIA agents shown as less than 100% efficient and high-ups like Kim more concerned with their bowel movements and off-duty pleasures.
Almost on a whim, Kim decides to take out Park that night, confiding in his loyal deputy, Min (Kim Eung-su), and the younger Ju. Alongside the black humor, helmer Im starts to increase the tension of the moment, with slow tracking-shots through the mansion's corridors prior to the actual, almost offhand assassination, halfway through the movie.
Thereon, following the messy bloodbath that involves other people in the manse, the movie really bares its satirical teeth. Chaos spreads through the ranks of the military and the KCIA, Kim is eventually arrested and a cool, offscreen voice wraps up the pic with news of what happened to the various participants.
Casting down the line is tip-top, with special kudos to Baek (the kidnapped businessman in "Save the Green Planet") as KCIA boss Kim, a performance of languid self-loathing and buried anger that anchors the whole movie, tonally and dramatically. Han ("Shiri," "Tell Me Something") has hardly been better in recent years, loosening his usual buttoned-up style for a gum-chomping, foul-mouthed role as a secret service thug.
Film is the most elaborately staged of all of Im's movies, with none of the small-scale grit of "Tears" or edgy camerawork of "Good Woman."
Lee Min-bok's large mansion set, all shadowy corners and corridors, is enhanced by d.p. Kim Woo-hyeong's atmospheric widescreen lensing, and exterior compositions are always filled with business.
Korean title is one of the songs sung by Miss Shim, and roughly means "That Lover of Mine."
Camera (color, widescreen), Kim Woo-hyeong; editor, Lee Eun-su; music, Kim Hong-jib; art director, Lee Min-bok; costumes, Kim Do-heui; sound (Dolby Digital), Kim Seok-weon, Han Cheol-heui; special visual effects, Jang Sung-ho. Reviewed at Cannes Film Festival (Directors Fortnight), May 13, 2005. Running time: 102 MIN.
 

With:
 Yun Yeo-jeong, Lee Jae-gu, Kim Sang-ho, Kim Seong-wook, Kim Tae-han.
(Korean, Japanese dialogue)
 


South Korean history may not be a mandatory part of the American grade school curriculum, but ignorance does not detract from the disorienting experience of The President's Last Bang —a bloody Three Stooges  account of the 1979 assassination of dictator Park Chunghee by his Korean Central Intelligence Agency  director Kim Jaegyu .
Having contributed a bracing zetz  of tabloid crassness to the New York Film Festival , Im Sangsoo's slapstick thriller—a dense scroll painted with an extremely broad brush—enters the marketplace. The President's Last Bang  confines its action largely to a single chaotic night, opening with a scene that mutatis mutandis might have been transposed from Where the Truth Lies —a gaggle of cuties hanging out in the presidential pool while their chaperone entertains no one in particular by reading aloud from a softcore romance novel.
Business as usual: One of the president's gum-chewing henchmen kicks out a demure hooker and her pushy mama-san. The context is a bit sketchy. Park's family evidently sued to remove introductory newsreel footage of ongoing political protests from the film. Thus, the president (Song Jaeho) is introduced babbling about his regimen of seal testicles—to clinch the point, there's a staged political rally in which the point is emphatically made that Park is the nation. (The movie's Korean title, taken from a song, translates as "That Lover of Mine.")
The President 's parade of officious fools, pompous tough guys, inept KCIA agents, querulous generals, and hapless bystanders can be a bit hard to follow without a scorecard. But once Park settles in for a banquet at the KCIA safe house, the scorecard, as well as the evening of geriatric karaoke with two not especially compliant hostesses, is soaked in gore. Who's on first? The lights in the room are cut too soon; the self-appointed assassin runs out of bullets and has to rush out for another gun. (Baik Yoonshik, who plays the dyspeptic KCIA chief, was last seen here as the victim of a madman in Save the Green Planet .)
From mid-movie on, confusion escalates (along with one's incredulity) as the body count mounts; a deadpan coda of haphazard prosecutions and executions only adds to the mystery. Was The President's Last Bang  diminished on its home turf by failing to provide a motive for these bloody events? Did Kim shoot Park because of a bad stomach, an imagined slight, a sudden whim? As the president enjoys showing off his Japanese, so the KCIA director has a propensity for paraphrasing Chairman Mao . Still he remains an enigmatic figure, confounding all rational sense of history by raising the possibility of an assassination without a conspiracy.
