
For no other reason than to draw in the torture crowd, they're selling "Primeval" as a serial-killer thriller, heavy on the gore. In fact it's something more interestingly bizarre, if not actually good: a cross between "Jaws" and "The Constant Gardener." 
That's right, the crusading Afrocentric agit-entertainment of "Blood Diamond" and "Catch a Fire" has percolated down to Z-grade monster movies. No surprise, the monster movie wins, but not without a fight. 
The mass murderer of the movie's trailer turns out to be a 25-foot crocodile that has terrorized the waters of northern Burundi and Lake Tanganyika for decades. The locals call him Gustave and he really exists -- go ahead, Google him -- although the filmmakers have relied on a computer-animated beastie instead. Gustave probably doesn't take direction well. Plus he's hell on the extras. 
An American news crew descends on the area to capture the giant and bring him back alive, dropping into a raging civil war between Hutu and Tutsi. The producer is the macho Tim (Dominic Purcell of TV's "Prison Break"), the on-air talent the earnest and bimbotic Aviva (Brooke Langton, "Melrose Place"), the cameraman/comic relief played gratingly by Orlando Jones. 
There's Jurgen Prochnow ("Das Boot"), once again in deep water in the Robert Shaw croc-hunter role. The less said about Gideon Emery as a wildlife adventurer in the unfortunate mold of the late Steve Irwin, the better. 
It soon becomes a toss-up as to who's the greater threat to these babes in the lake: Gustave or the minions of warlord Little Gustave (Dumisane Mbebe), whose rep is almost as bloody as his namesake. The cameraman accidentally videotapes an execution, and the Americans take in a local (Gabriel Malema) hoping to flee to the states. 
They also discuss issues of media responsibility and American awareness of African suffering in the dumbed-down language of late-night cable junk. "The more you help, the worse it gets," growls Tim. "Oh well, it doesn't mean you shouldn't try," chirps Aviva, although she clearly cares more for a stray puppy than any humans in sight. 
Then it's off to a violent near-rape in which the heroine conveniently loses her shirt, followed by more rampaging appearances by Gustave. The croc-hunter describes his favorite bait as a mixture of "blood, urine, and pheromones," which really isn't a bad review of the film itself. 
"Primeval" is a hoot if you're in the mood, though, and it gets points for trying to stuff a little globo-think into the minds of Friday night mayhem fans (who will probably rebel, since only one skull pops like a grape). In the end, broader messages get beaten down by genre. "All meat is meat," says someone here, and if that's not modern horror-movie realpolitik, I don't want to know what is.


Horror movies are routinely slammed for recycling the same old formulas, so you have to give "Primeval" some credit for imagination, or at least perversity: It's 55% giant-crocodile "Jaws" and 45% fact-inspired, "Blood Diamond"-esque civil-war-violence thriller. There won't be any Oscar campaigning for this
 Africa-set action movie, but despite some inevitable silly moments, handsome widescreen production is decently handled genre fare. Its dumping by the Mouse House into the market sans sneaks or press screenings makes pic look worse than it is -- it's not exactly good, but it's not bad, and far from boring.
Breaking a political scandal that turns out to be baseless leaves ace TV reporter Tim (Dominic Purcell) no option but to accept the unappealing assignment his boss sticks him with: finding and capturing the world's largest croc, a 25-foot monster in war-torn Burundi that's been eating villagers for decades. Assisting him on the tabloid-like stunt "story" are Aviva (Brooke Langton), a fluff-news reporter who hopes this will be her big break; cameraman Steven (Orlando Jones), pic's designated wisecracking comic relief; and world-famed croc expert Matthew (Gideon Emery, instructed to evoke the late Steve Irwin, albeit as a snippy jerk-- something that ceased to be a good idea several months ago).
Since action is set in pre-2005 Burundi, violence is still rife between warlords and anyone who gets in their way. Natch, the croc (which locals dub Gustave) is located in an area also terrorized by followers of one elusive warlord who's dubbed himself Little Gustave. Crusty local guide Jacob (Jurgen Prochnow, playing the Robert Shaw "Jaws" role, complete with near-identical exit) informs the travelers that it's a tossup which Gustave "is the colder-blooded."
Despite armed guards, the party is machine-gunned upon en route. Still, they make it intact to the site of the latest villager-munchings. Matthew has brought along a large reinforced-steel cage he's designed to capture the critter alive, though for personal reasons Jacob would much rather see it dead. All concerned (now including a small dog and Gabriel Malema as orphaned teen Jojo, both of whom the visitors "adopt") settle in with their live-goat bait, weapons and high-tech surveillance equipment.
Needless to say, when the scaly behemoth does show up, things do not go as planned. They go even worse when Little Gustave (whose real identity is revealed late) finds out Steven accidentally witnessed an execution in the bush and videotaped it. Henchmen are dispatched to retrieve the tape and kill everyone.
While the combination of creature thrills and historically inspired paramilitary thuggery may strike some as rather tasteless, John Brancato and Michael Ferris' script does a solid enough job juggling both perils so they have equal narrative importance. Director Michael Katleman, making his bigscreen debut after a couple decades' TV work, keeps the pacing tight, the acting straight-faced and the laughs mostly intentional (though Jones' one-liners occasionally fall flat).
Editing is sometimes a little too frenetic to maximize the heavily physical, fairly gory action. Though Gustave is clearly a CGI reptile when seen in full-body motion, production package is high-grade for this sort of enterprise, with excellent lensing by Edward J. Pei of the spectacular wildlife and landscapes (South Africa standing in for Burundi). Soundtrack features a nice mix of African and orchestral sounds.
