 Saverio Costanzo's film "Private" distills the Israeli-Palestinian conflict into a nightmarish microcosm  when a midnight raid by Israeli soldiers on the house of a peaceful, well-educated Palestinian family turns the home into an occupied territory.  Imprisoning the family on the ground floor and commandeering the upstairs as a lookout,  the soldiers tell the confined  that under no circumstances are they to go upstairs.  The home is that of Mohammad (Mohammad Bakri), a Palestinian school principal who believes in nonviolence; his wife, Samiah (Areen Omari); and their five children: a large, isolated two-story stone house  in a crossfire zone between a Palestinian village and an Israeli settlement on the West Bank. While their house is occupied, the family members are allowed to go about their business during the day; at night they are confined to the living room.  Their predicament, their internal conflicts and their edgy relationship with their captors, who become a bit more humanized as the story goes along, make "Private" an emotionally and politically loaded allegory.  Like the recently released "Syrian Bride," it is a film in which a no man's land, in this case the gray area between battle lines, acquires a symbolic weight.  The first feature film by Mr. Costanzo, an Italian documentarian, "Private" is based on a true story. It was filmed documentary-style on digital video with hand-held cameras, in southern Italy, where the rocky terrain resembles that of the West Bank.  To leave or to stay: that is the question posed throughout the film. The family members have different answers. Mohammad, dead set on remaining, offers compelling reasons for staying put. Mr. Bakri, a Palestinian actor, personifies a benign but strict paternal authority who holds the divided family together. You can see his backbone stiffen when challenged. He refuses to show fear, even during a hair-raising scene in which a gun is pointed at his head for a very long moment, while his family watches in terror.  Samiah, who wants to leave for the safety of the children, lets it be known that she is staying under duress. The scared younger children also want to go. But the fiery oldest daughter, Mariam (Hend Ayoub), who has just been accepted into a German medical school, would rather stay, defying her father's insistence that she seize her academic opportunity.  She and Jamal (Marco Alsaying), the older of two teenage boys, endanger the family with their acts of  rebellion. In scenes that build an excruciating tension, Mariam sneaks upstairs, hides inside an armoire and observes the soldiers through a crack in the door that she narrows and widens. As she observes her captors watching television and bickering, she glimpses their confusion and boredom, and they become real.  Jamal  rigs an explosive device and catapult near the greenhouse that the soldiers  repeatedly tear down because it interferes with their sightlines. Militant Arab television stokes his fantasies of himself as a holy Islamic warrior.  Upstairs in the rooms occupied by the soldiers, their commander, Ofer (Lior Miller), copes with the same challenges to his authority as those faced by Mohammad.  But "Private" also shows the human instinct to fight  oppression, even if that rebellion risks disaster. It's what oppressed people do.

Political realities are a powerful bonus to, rather than the only reason for, "Private," an emotionally gripping drama about a family whose house in an occupied zone is commandeered by soldiers. The family happens to be Palestinian and the military Israeli, but this first feature by Italo documaker Saverio Costanzo could be set in any war zone where force of arms becomes rule of law and an unbridgeable gap exists between occupied and occupier. Unanimous winner of Locarno competition's top prize, the Golden Leopard, looks set for further fest billeting, though pic's noticeably DV origins will limit wider incursions.
Stern, middle-aged paterfamilias Mohammad (Mohammad Bakri) and his younger wife Samia (Areen Omari) scream at each other in opening scene shot, like the whole movie, with handheld cameras in grungy, vid-sourced colors. By inference from the dialogue and exterior shots of the isolated house, it's clear they're a Palestinian family in an Israeli-occupied, rural zone; however, in line with the film's semi-allegorical approach, there's never any clue as to the exact time or location.
Samia wants to move with their five children to a safer place; Mohammad, a teacher, says this is their home and they will remain come what may. "Being a refugee is not being," he states. The pull between these two arguments -- Samia's emotional one, Mohammad's rational one -- informs the whole picture.
In a powerful sequence of raw hysteria, a small group of Israeli soldiers, led by the single-minded Ofer (Lior Miller), bursts into the house one night. The family is ordered to remain on the ground floor, with its living room and kitchen, while the soldiers occupy the upper floor, which the Palestinians are forbidden to enter at any time.
Thus begins a rondo-like drama in which Mohammad, caught between the knee-jerk racism of the ruthless, paranoid Ofer and of his own family -- especially Samia, eldest daughter Mariam (Hend Ayoub) and eldest son Jamal (Marco Alsaying) -- tries to keep a lid on the increasingly volatile shotgun marriage under his roof. Pic's initially alienating, unattractive look becomes less distracting as the human element ripens.
Aside from the politics, film works well as a realistic semi-thriller, with the emotionally hair-trigger Ofer instilling almost as much fear in his own men as in the Palestinians, and both Mariam and Jamal threatening the uneasy calm with small, rebellious acts. Mariam's eavesdropping on the Israeli soldiers from an upstairs cupboard is a pure script convenience to humanize the occupiers, but it also works well in cinematic terms, with several tense moments when she's about to be discovered.
More's the pity pic blows much of its credibility in the final minutes with an English-lingo pacifist song (by Roger Waters), boomed out on the soundtrack, that's banally didactic. Its removal would do the film a major service, especially for Anglophone auds.
Casting is tip-top, with well-known thesps Bakri, who copped the Locarno best actor prize, and Miller completely believable as the Palestinian father and Israeli officer, and other pro actors from the region filling smaller roles. Originally planned to be shot in Israel, pic ended up being entirely (and convicingly) shot in Cabala, southern Italy, for reasons of cast security.
Camera (color, DV-to-35mm), Luigi Martinucci; editor, Francesca Calvelli; music, Alter Ego; art directors/costumes, Ludovica Amati, Einat Fadida; sound (Dolby), Gabriele Moretti, Antonio Dolce; assistant director, Monica Ricci. Reviewed at Locarno Film Festival (competing), Aug. 11, 2004. Running time: 93 MIN.
 


Fans of old-school French crime flicks will be reconvening at Film Forum, where Claude Sautet 's 1960 Classe Tous Risques  has what amounts to its local premiere. (A dubbed version opened 40-something years ago on 42nd Street as The Big Risk .) The title is an untranslatable pun on tourism and insurance; the premise is existential. Sad-eyed, big-beaked Lino Ventura , usually a secondario , here plays a brutally resourceful slab of beefcake—a French thug on the lam in Italy  for a decade who needs to get back home, along with his wife and two little boys. A daylight robbery in Milan  precipitates a remarkable chase through Italy topped by a shoot-out on the beach at Nice. Stuck with the kids, Ventura manages to make his way to Paris , thanks to guardian angel Jean-Paul Belmondo , fresh from Breathless  and the cutest pug-ugly in Pigalle. In those precincts, it's as if the old-timer has returned from the dead.
Classe Tous Risques  is shot on city streets but unfolds in the world of the movies—in a Godardian touch that anticipates Godard, the Ventura character is identified by the cops as "an old pal of Pierrot le Fou." The new titles are flavorsome, and the restoration is up to Rialto 's previous high standards—shades of gray with the pale glow of an overcast autumn sky.
