         The title of David Auburn's play "Proof" refers to two things: a specific mathematical proof that comes to dominate the plot as well as the human need to offer proof, to demonstrate to others our value, our worth, the truth of our talents and the sincerity of our emotions. In that sense "Proof" is an especially appropriate title for a film that ended up having a lot to prove.
 
  For despite its Pulitzer Prize-winning pedigree, and in some ways through no fault of its own, the John Madden-directed film raised several potentially troubling questions. Was the delay in releasing a drama originally scheduled for last December due to its quality? Could this quintessentially theatrical vehicle be successfully transferred to the screen? And could star Gwyneth Paltrow handle this kind of powerful, seriously dramatic starring role?
 


         






    Against considerable odds and despite a shaky start, "Proof" proves itself in every area. Thanks largely to Paltrow's beautifully unadorned performance, an exceptional portrait of psychological fragility that is honest, direct and devastating, this is a film that really has to be seen.
 
  It's a measure of both the tabloidization of our culture and the nature of Paltrow's filmography that her work here will surprise those who only follow her private life and didn't catch her fine work as Sylvia Plath in the little-seen "Sylvia" or don't remember her stark performance in 1993's "Flesh and Bone."
 
  Paltrow's Oscar for "Shakespeare in Love" notwithstanding, it's hard to think of as gifted an actress who's chosen to appear in so much forgettable piffle, and we can only hope that a new, more balanced and fruitful cycle is beginning for her.
 
  Though three of its four main characters are mathematicians, "Proof" is intent not on exploring math itself but on using the subject as a vehicle for investigating issues like the excitement and painful fragility of both creativity and personal relationships and the unnerving proximity of madness and genius.
 
  Screenwriters Auburn and Rebecca Miller have opened up the play by adding new locations and one major new scene. But "Proof's" story is still set primarily in and around a large old house near the University of Chicago, and as such initially feels uneasily stage-bound.
 
  The house has been home to Robert (Anthony Hopkins), a groundbreaking mathematician who made major contributions to three fields and revolutionized one of them twice before he was 22. It's now inhabited by his 27-year-old daughter Catherine (Paltrow), who is about to be visited by her New York-based sister Claire (Hope Davis). Also a visitor is Hal (Jake Gyllenhaal), a young protégé of Robert's who has become a professor in his own right.
 
  "Proof" opens on a rainy night with a bedraggled Catherine absent-mindedly changing the channels on the TV. Robert comes in and engages her in conversation about her forlorn state. From the moment he opens his mouth, something is not right, and in fact it's immediately revealed that Robert has just died, setting "Proof's" plot in motion.
 
  Robert, it turns out, was not just a genius, he also was someone who increasingly went in and out of sanity as he got older. He'd had lucid periods, one lasting a full nine months, but the last three years had been marked by bouts of madness that included filling 103 notebooks with compulsive writing, and a belief that "aliens were sending him messages through the Dewey decimal numbers on library books."
 
  Catherine is in the state she's in because she's been her father's sole caregiver. Once a promising math student who, her father boasts, knew what a prime number was before she could read, she dropped out of school, giving up her career and her life as her father's illness progressed. Very much like him, she has her own demons to fight, including the fear that she has inherited her father's tendency to madness.
 
  The arrival of Claire for their father's funeral only makes things worse. Pulled together and assertive where Catherine is frumpy and distracted, Claire, beautifully played with a fine sisterly edge by Davis, brings out the worst in her sibling.
 
  Catherine comes off to her sister as awkward and humorless, a wary woman with few social graces and multiple hard edges. Both Claire and Hal, her father's former student, for their own reasons desperately want to help Catherine regain her footing. Then, suddenly, something happens that completely changes everyone's equations.
 
  Just as the film's stage-bound qualities seem problematic early on, so does Madden's direction. The man who guided Paltrow in "Shakespeare in Love," he is a filmmaker whose instincts can feel too much on the nose, and in "Proof's" initial stages that tendency makes the characters and the story feel unduly predictable.
 
  But Madden, who also directed Paltrow in a well-reviewed London stage production of "Proof," improves as the film progresses. His familiarity with the material and his history with Paltrow increase the film's intensity to the point it trumps the underlying earnestness. Madden also displays the ability to create a safe place not only for the star but for all his actors to do their best work.
 
  Basically a four-hander, "Proof" is blessed in all its key roles. Hopkins, the heart of the film's extensive flashbacks, has the kind of great-man presence his role demands. Davis takes the character that veers closest to cliché and gives it intensity and believability, while Gyllenhaal in his most adult part to date brings essential sweetness to the contradictory persona of a heartthrob math geek.
 
  Finally, however, "Proof" is incontrovertibly Paltrow's movie. Her performance is so emotionally naked, her on-screen uncertainty and insecurity so piercing, that the raw pain at the core of this story never fades from view. Hers is a performance that redeems everything else about this film, and allows for the hope that there will be many more to come in this gifted actress' career.
 
 'Proof'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some sexual content, language and drug references
 
 Times guidelines:
 Mature subject matter
 
 Released by Miramax Films. Director John Madden. Producers Jeffrey Sharp, John N. Hart Jr., Robert Kessel, Alison Owen. Screenplay David Auburn, Rebecca Miller, based on the play by Auburn. Cinematographer Alwin Kuchler. Editor Mick Audsley. Costumes Jill Taylor. Music Stephen Warbeck. Production design Alice Normington. Art director Keith Slote. Set decorator Barbara Herman-Skelding. Running time: 1 hour, 40 minutes. In general release.   

Gwyneth Paltrow, in her powerful performance in Sylvia , caught the scary tenor of mental illness — the way that Sylvia Plath, in her forcefulness and creeping rage, kept crashing through the fragile foundations of a weak identity. In Proof , Paltrow plays yet another young woman who is being gnawed at by termites of instability, only this time out, her performance, rather than startling, is merely competent: earnest and overly familiar. She's one more depressive mope in dirty lank hair and an oversize wool-knit sweater, whining about how unfair the world is — a character who, for all of her meticulously embedded quirkiness, borders on type.
On the eve of her 27th birthday, Catherine (Paltrow), the heroine of David Auburn's thin if celebrated Broadway play, is a nervous, stammering, misfit wallflower who has spent most of her adult life caring for her brilliant mathematician father. Robert, played by Anthony Hopkins in snowy white hair and beard, with an avuncular manner of brainy excitement, did revolutionary work in his early 20s and then suffered a massive breakdown; he may have been institutionalized. He has maintained a casual, on-and-off relationship with reality ever since, and Catherine may or may not have inherited both her father's tendencies: his genius and his insanity.
Proof  has been reworked for the big screen, with restructuring and added dialogue, by Auburn and Rebecca Miller, and the director, John Madden (Shakespeare in Love ), has opened up the action so that it now flows through airports and Armani boutiques and bustling university corridors. Yet Proof  remains one of those clever, facile plays that tries to be ambiguous and tidy at the same time. It's like The Glass Menagerie  rewritten by Aaron Sorkin.
The movie opens just after Robert's death, when Catherine, still living in her father's messy, book-laden cocoon of a college-town clapboard house, plays host to two visitors, both of whom she regards, in her muzzy paranoia, as intruders. There's Hal (Jake Gyllenhaal), a handsome young grad student who studied under Catherine's dad and is now looking through his notebooks, searching, amid the psychotic scribblings, for any lost nuggets of mathematical theory he may have left behind. The aspiring prof also plays drums in a rock band, which allows the movie to include at least a scene or two that consists of something other than dolefully dry debate. Then there's Claire (Hope Davis), Catherine's sister, a New York yuppie who, in her patronizing desperation to save her sibling, would like to neaten up every loose end within reach, including...Catherine's hair.
The two have a conversation in which Claire pushes the wonders of jojoba, a substance Catherine has apparently never heard of. It's the sort of pointed stage dialogue that revolves around overly ordered dichotomies: chatty, well-groomed consumer princess versus morose, unkempt academic beatnik. Yet all I could think was, Is Catherine so out of it that she has never even glanced at the label of a shampoo bottle? Proof  flirts with hefty themes, yet too often it barely tethers them to a recognizable, lived-in world.
Nosing around Robert's notebooks, Hal doesn't find a lot, at least not until Catherine directs him to a solitary notebook in a locked desk drawer. It contains a visionary proof, a theorem of more than 40 pages that could be the proof, as well, of Robert's restored sanity. Yet did he write what was in the notebook, or was it Catherine herself? And if she wrote the proof, is it also proof that she inherited his gifts, or confirmation that she's doomed to repeat his slide into madness?
The link between higher mathematics and mental derangement had genuine resonance in A Beautiful Mind , but in Proof  the connection is far too axiomatic. Auburn withholds key information about his characters, then passes off the missing puzzle pieces as ''mystery.'' In flashback, Hopkins plays Robert as a saint of knowledge, desperate to get ''the machinery'' — his grasp of higher numerical systems — working. His instability, on the other hand, is portrayed in a cut-rate fashion. Paltrow, speaking in a dishrag whimper, works to give Catherine a tremulous vulnerability, but she lacks the obsessiveness of a numbers-driven personality. The movie turns the issue of who authored the proof into a gimmicky, diminished game of did-she-or-didn't-she?
It's hard to quarrel with the way Proof  depicts mathematical genius as an unknowable abstraction. Otherwise, we might need advanced degrees to watch it. If only the film didn't carry that same intellectual shorthand over to its portrayal of mental illness, as though insanity were a light switch that could be flipped on or off. Proof  is watchable but second-rate, the minds it depicts too finite to be beautiful.


Constructed with the artful mathematical precision that dances through the unstable but gifted minds of its father-and-daughter protagonists, David Auburn's "Proof" -- perhaps inevitably -- was more beguiling and intimate on stage than on screen. But despite less-than-ideal casting of the male roles, and a tendency to soften the Pulitzer Prize-winning work's thorny humor with a more sober tone, director John Madden has woven together an elegant, intelligent drama of a breed increasingly rare in mainstream American movies. Whether or not a significant audience exists for it will depend greatly on awards season attention, likely to center on femme stars Gwyneth Paltrow and Hope Davis.
Those unfamiliar with Auburn's 2000 play will draw comparisons with "A Beautiful Mind," which shares a focus on the fine line separating madness from genius as illustrated in a mathematician -- in this case two. However, "Proof" is a far more subtle exploration of similar issues, without the biopic backbone or the sentimental payoff of the Ron Howard film and therefore without the easy audience hook.
But in the troubled character of Catherine -- played previously by Paltrow on the London stage in a Donmar production also directed by Madden -- it has a complex and hauntedly magnetic central figure.
The 27-year-old daughter of groundbreaking mathematician Robert (Anthony Hopkins), who slid into dementia long before his death, Catherine feels the brooding shadow of her own tenuous sanity as she prepares for her father's funeral. Intrusions into her depressive cocoon come via Hal (Jake Gyllenhaal), a former student of her father's, now teaching math at the University of Chicago, and her sister Claire (Davis), who breezes in from New York, proffering coffee, bagels and jojoba conditioner as pick-me-ups.
Hal insists on combing through Catherine's father's hundreds of notebooks in the hope of finding lucid work amid the disjointed graphomaniacal scribblings. He also persists in trying to get closer to the borderline paranoid woman.
Catherine lets down her guard when they sleep together after a post-funeral party. She hands Hal the key to a desk drawer where a notebook is hidden containing a proof of a mathematical theorem that could prove a revolutionary discovery.
Creating the illusion of a far weightier drama, Auburn's sleight of hand was particularly deft onstage in regard to the play's two chief revelations: the first, that Catherine's conversations with her father are in reality with his ghost; and the second concerning the author of the proof. Those plot points lack the element of surprise in the film that the theatrical bracketing of a scene change can heighten.
Mostly, the play makes only slender gains by being opened up. Daniel Sullivan's original production unfolded entirely on the ample porch of the family's house. Madden keeps much of the action there; excursions to the college campus or a department store add little beyond the visual depth of Alwin Kuchler's sleek and graceful widescreen lensing.
One of the more successful elaborations is Catherine's speech at the funeral. Despite its forays into the arcane world of mathematics, this is a family drama and it works best when rooted in the rundown home that Claire wants to sell out from under Catherine.
Questionable choices in the casting of Robert and Hal somewhat dull the balance of this four-character piece. Making Robert British to accommodate Hopkins was fine, but it's a bland characterization, too indistinguishable from his other muted, unsatisfying turn as an academic in "The Human Stain." Only in his final scene, in which anger deflates into the realization that his perceived productivity is in fact inane rambling, do we really feel something for Hopkins' Robert.
Gyllenhaal achieves a good balance of sensitivity with a possible opportunistic agenda, while also revealing the dulled awareness of a guy who knows he's not quite talented enough to dazzle in his chosen field. But hunky Gyllenhaal is probably no one's idea of a math nerd; his excitement at being part of a possible breakthrough mathematical discovery never quite sits right on the physically confident actor's handsome, puppyish features.
Likewise, actually seeing the band in which he and his math cohorts play and making them a relatively cool ensemble kind of kills the joke of party-animal theoreticians.
Paltrow is entirely persuasive in a vulnerable performance low on vanity or showy moments. She makes Catherine's sorrow, her resentment and her fear of being her father's daughter a vivid, destabilizing force. Her crushed realization that her trust in Hal has been misplaced, and then her slow reckoning that the same realization may also be unfounded, are played with insight and economy.
The film's shift to a more somber tone from the play may be partly the influence of Auburn's co-screenwriter Rebecca Miller, as perhaps is the underscoring of Catherine as a woman almost numbed into complacency by the unlikelihood of achieving recognition in the boys' club of math.
One notable improvement in the screenplay is the amplified sense that Catherine perceives her own mathematical work as a potential source of shame to her incapacitated father, bringing clarity to some of her more self-sacrificial behavior.
Claire is a role that easily could be unsympathetic and one-dimensional, but the always wonderful Davis softens her intrusiveness with genuine concern for her sister, and with a touching understatement in conveying her awareness that the exceptional talents in the family gene pool went elsewhere.
Madden's melancholy handle on the material is echoed in Stephen Warbeck's lovely, if somewhat overused score. Better in its gentle introspective moments than its sentimental ones, the composer's work often takes on the urgent, obsessive mood of Philip Glass music, which represents an apt sonic accompaniment to the ticking of the tormented mathematical minds at the drama's center.

A Miramax  prestige pic based on David Auburn 's Pulitzer-winning Broadway hit, Proof  insists that life is not as tidy as mathematics—an axiom this upper-middlebrow contrivance illustrates with the help of a dramatic schema that is itself more mathematical than lifelike.
An esteemed Chicago number theorist (Anthony Hopkins ) dies after a slow descent into dementia, leaving his daughter and caretaker Catherine (an effectively wan and muted Gwyneth Paltrow ), herself a gifted mathematician, grief stricken and unsure of her own sanity. Even before the funeral, Hal (Jake Gyllenhaal ), a pet student of her father's, starts combing the notebooks the great man filled with disjointed ramblings in his final years, hoping to salvage some flashes of lucidity. Shrill, officious elder sis Claire (Hope Davis , almost redeeming an impossible yuppie caricature) swoops in from New York, determined to sell the family house and restructure Catherine's life for her. Though wary of these two interlopers, Catherine eventually lets her guard down and shares with them a notebook in her father's desk drawer that contains a mind-bending and enormously complex discovery in the field of prime numbers. (Both the play and the film completely elide the content of the solution.) Catherine claims it's her work; Hal and Claire are skeptical, and Catherine in turn can't prove she wrote the proof.
Like so many prodigy movies, Proof  treads heavily on the line between genius and madness, unsubtly wondering how much of each the daughter has inherited from her father's once beautiful mind. Auburn's scenario (the script is credited to the playwright and to filmmaker Rebecca Miller ) is nothing if not calculating, predicated on systematic twists and reversals. John Madden 's competent, monotonous film version, not exactly stagebound but hardly freewheeling, only underscores its mechanical nature. In its central mystery, Proof  exploits the gap between the unshakable logic of mathematical knowledge and the doubt and incompleteness inherent in human understanding. But the tension evaporates once the proof's author is identified—in unwieldy flashbacks that we're asked to accept as irrefutable evidence. At the very least, this should be a movie that holds itself to a higher burden of proof.
