 The teeth are yellow in the Australian western "The Proposition," and the sky is as red as blood. Directed by John Hillcoat from a screenplay by the darkly moody musician and author Nick Cave, the film tells a story of murder in the outback that is as cruel as it is aesthetically flamboyant. Here flies swarm over the living and the dead with equal attention, perhaps because one doesn't really seem all that different from the other. In the late 19th century, warm flesh and cold meat each appear fairly rancid under the glare of the hot Australian sun, or at least when caught in the similarly pitiless gaze of these filmmakers.  The wide open spaces and roughneck history of modern Australia, including the wholesale slaughter of the continent's native peoples, make  the country  a natural setting for a western. Not surprisingly, given Mr. Cave's fondness for the baroquely macabre (one of his recent CD's is titled "Abattoir Blues/The Lyre of Orpheus"), "The Proposition" takes a jaundiced view of the frontier. That's particularly true of the white settlers, who in both their tooth decay and moral rot come across as more desperate than even Sam Peckinpah's most colorful desperadoes, and who appear fairly indistinguishable no matter on what side of the law they travel. Mr. Cave left Australia years ago, but his native country's penal-colony origins and mysterious beauty have clearly retained a strong grip on his imagination.  Given that "The Proposition" tells something of a national-foundation story, there's a primal, almost biblical tint to its parts. Guy Pearce plays Charlie Burns, who, after riding in an outlaw gang alongside his older brother, Arthur (Danny Huston), is imprisoned by the reform-minded Captain Stanley (a magnificent Ray Winstone). The captain cuts Charlie loose after presenting him with the proposal of the film's title: either Charlie kills Arthur by Christmas, which is fast approaching, or Stanley will hang their teenage brother, a simpleton called Mikey (Richard Wilson). Fortified by alcohol, Charlie rides into the outback, looking for his older brother, a butcher of men whom the Aborigines liken to a dog; fortified by love for his wife, Martha (Emily Watson), the captain uneasily remains behind.  As this lineup suggests, the cast of "The Proposition" is reason enough to see the film. Mr. Huston has carved out his own screen niche as a creepy-crawler, and while his character is at once underconceived and overbaked, given to spouting verse like the poetic creation he is, the actor makes him a wonderfully substantial presence, whether galloping across a plain or sitting Buddha-like in front of the sinking sun. There is something heavy and monumental about the way Mr. Huston takes up film space (in this he can recall his father, John Huston), which makes a nice counterpart to the otherworldly Mr. Pearce, a performer of such apparent delicate physicality and eerie grace that you half expect him to be carried off by the wind.  Both actors are memorable, as is Mr. Winstone, whose surprising, occasionally eccentric performance provides "The Proposition" with some of its finest moments. Sweat pouring off his thick body, matting his hair and spotting his uniform, Captain Stanley seems like a man perpetually out of his element, whether he's squirming under his wife's touch or trying to bring his brutish men to heel.  Boiling over with rage and choked by despair, he appears trapped in existential impotence, yet wages war at everything and everyone around him: his men, the town, the outlaws, his wife, even his own body. Few actors register menace on screen as persuasively as Mr. Winstone, who here directs that menace inward, turning Stanley into one more victim of the land's unrelenting violence.  And unrelenting it surely is. "The Proposition" probably comes closer to the truth than origin stories like "The Patriot," a Hollywood fantasy that turns  the American Revolution into a glib action flick.  Like some other storytellers intent on setting the record straight or at least a bit less crooked, Mr. Cave and Mr. Hillcoat occasionally and temporarily lose their way by letting the technological excesses of the present swamp the grim excesses of the past.  It is, for instance, hard to say what precisely we are to glean from the image of a man having his head shot to pieces, other than the skill of the special-effects artists and the realization that, in their own grubbily picturesque way, the filmmakers are as beholden to a kind of romance as anyone.  "The Proposition" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). There is extreme gun and knife violence.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

The revisionist Western rides into the 1880s Australian outback, in "The Proposition." Toplining Guy Pearce as an outlaw whose sins will be pardoned if he kills his brother, pic's nihilism places it in the genre's "Deadwood" corral. Though its unremittingly bleak tone and bouts of graphic violence make B.O. paydirt unlikely, this robust Oz-U.K. co-production scripted by rock figure Nick Cave should find hitching posts in numerous frontiers. Following its Toronto festival world preem, film opens Down Under Oct. 6.
First feature by helmer John Hillcoat since the misfired jungle meller, "To Have and to Hold" (1996), is a return to the muscular form of his locally praised debut, "Ghosts ... of the Civil Dead" (1988). Collaborators on both those films, Hillcoat and Cave have here found their most fertile ground yet for allegory-rich examinations of life and death in remote, pressure-cooker environments.
Pic lets bullets do the talking in a furious opening shootout between police and outlaws Charlie Burns (Guy Pearce) and brother Mike (Richard Wilson), who surrender to Capt. Stanley (Ray Winstone), an Englishman on a mission to "tame this land." But Charlie and Mike are only two-thirds of an Irish family wanted for the murder of a pregnant woman. The trophy catch is eldest brother Arthur Burns (Danny Huston), a psychotic, almost mythic figure holed up in a region so forbidding even Aboriginal deputy Jacko (David Gulpilil) won't enter. 
Stanley's proposition to Charlie is simple. To save himself and Mike from the noose, he must track and kill his older brother. With no choice, Charlie accedes, and starts asking questions at resting posts populated exclusively by miscreants and intruders.
Thesp John Hurt seizes the moment memorably in the juicy role of one lowlife, Jellon Lamb, a weather-beaten bounty hunter who tells Charlie, "I came to this beleaguered land and the god in me evaporated."
Charlie succeeds in locating Arthur at the film's halfway mark, but finding the will to eliminate his charismatic and dominant older brother is another matter. Aside from occasional moments of murky philosophizing between the two, the big question of whether he'll kill Arthur is suspensefully intercut with the proposition as it affects Stanley. His gamble has stirred discontent in constabulary ranks and triggered the dangerous disapproval of above-the-law town boss Fletcher (David Wenham), a supercilious proponent of Aboriginal extermination and lynch-mob justice.
Stanley's most pressing concern is for the safety of his wife, Martha (Emily Watson), who's attracting stares and whispers in the wake of Fletcher's rabble-rousing and his undermining of her husband's authority. These forebodings are contrasted with tender scenes in which Stanley and Martha play-act as Cockney types and prepare to celebrate a traditional European Christmas in stifling summer heat.
Underpinned by commentary on precisely this kind of disharmony between white settlers and the places they are determined to inhabit (however incongruously), Cave's script moves stealthily toward a ferocious finale at the Stanley household that doesn't disappoint in its settling of all outstanding scores.
Performances, right down to mangy-looking bit-parters, are exemplary. Both Winstone and a poised Watson are spot-on as square pegs in a dangerously round colonial hole. Pearce expertly seeds Charlie's steely countenance with pangs of conscience that provide auds with a lifeline for emotional investment. Huston shrewdly underplays the dominant heavy.
Acknowledging genre forbears from classical American to Euro varieties, pic is slave to none. Production design, costuming and d.p. Benoit Delhomme's non-travelogue widescreen compositions unite in birthing the first genuine, blood-and-thunder Aussie Western. Effective score by Cave and Warren Ellis is a tingly mix of strings and percussive jabs.
 Camera (Atlab color, Technicolor prints, Panavision widescreen), Benoit Delhomme; editor, Jon Gregory; music, Cave, Warren Ellis; production designer, Chris Kennedy; art directors, Marita Mussett, Bill Booth; costume designer, Margot Wilson; sound (Dolby Digital), Craig Walmsley; assistant director, Darren Mallett; casting, Nikki Barrett (Australia), Gary Davy (U.K.). Reviewed at Hoyts Cinema Paris, Sydney, July 21, 2005. (In Toronto Film Festival -- Visions. Also in Berlin Film Fest -- Panorama.) Running time: 104 MIN.
 


 
 


 

The western may be lost to us as any sort of sustained tradition, but as the titles Unforgiven , Dead Man , and A History of Violence  suggest, it intermittently returns as an unquiet ghost—this week in an Australian variant, The Proposition .
A true anachronism and an authentic lone ranger,The Proposition —directed by John Hillcoat  from Nick Cave 's script—is as primal, savage, and downright miserablist as all but the greatest of Hollywood 's terminal oat operas. Conjuring up a bit of Peckinpah mayhem, it opens violently in medias res—a hard rain of bullets perforating the walls of some wretched cabin as a local lawman (Ray Winstone ) captures a pair of desperado brothers. Winstone jails the younger (Richard Wilson ) and sends the other (Guy Pearce ) on a traitor's mission to save the kid from a Christmas date with the hangman by tracking down and killing their eldest brother (Danny Huston ).
A blarney-prone psychopath whom the fearful aboriginals dub "dog fella," brooding Huston dwells somewhere in the back of the outback with a cult-like gang of wild Irish outlaws. Pearce plods on but it's Huston, with less screen time, who effectively splits the movie with (and ultimately steals it from) Winstone. Huston's character is brutal and poetic; Winstone's is brutal and prosaic, his imperial burden embodied in the Victorian form of his corseted wife (Emily Watson ). In the best western tradition, he's sufficiently responsible to attempt to protect his prisoner from a lynch mob—although, as in the most anti-American of counterculture westerns, civilization (such as it is) seems built on a mound of aboriginal bones.
Early on, Pearce encounters a drunken adventurer (John Hurt ), who in one show- stopping scene, takes it upon himself to wheezily explicate Darwin's (new) theory of evolution. Descent from the apes seems positively natural in this dry-gulch hellhole of orange skies, buzzing flies, and ferocious carnage—a landscape rendered all the more uncanny by the incantatory drone of Cave's whispering, muttering score. The climactic Christmas Day dinner of dreadful retribution is a terrifying prospect, but for anyone with a yen for our great lost genre, it's also some sort of gift.
