
Thailand's Tony Jaa is a martial-arts tornado and the chiropractor from hell.
In ``The Protector," dozens of anonymous goons in black suits (I lost count at 30) wait their turn to attack Jaa and for Jaa, in turn, to crack a forearm with the back of his leg or use his knee to snap a jaw. The men who run up to him are brave and stupid. During that one dazzlingly absurd sequence, if the sight of dudes having their spines busted and tossed onto a pile grows tiresome (it's a long fight), watching the pile writhe in agony is fun, too. Even better, or worse if you're on Jaa's receiving end: It's all excruciatingly real.
To paraphrase Roger Ebert writing about Jaa's previous outing, 2005's ``Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior," ``The Protector" is about 84 minutes long, and only four of those minutes are devoted to plot. Jaa plays Cam, a sweet-faced young man who loves his father and his elephants. When poachers kill dad and nab the animals, he hops on a plane from his Thai village to Sydney for rescue and revenge. He's looking for a guy named Johnny, but apparently it's the fearsome, whip-wielding Chinese-empress type he wants. She runs an international crime syndicate and is waiting at the end of the movie like some villain in the very last level of a video game.
Prachya Pinkaew also directed ``Ong-Bak," and his handle on the action is decent. (Surely the on-set medic had the tougher job.) But much of the movie feels slapdash at best, calling to mind episodes of mid-period ``Power Rangers." The editing, for instance, is riotously abrupt. A speedboat launches into a helicopter. Massive explosion. Cut. Black screen. Title, announcing, ``Sydney Two Weeks Later." The terrible dubbing and worse acting only add to the fun.
Jaa transcends this kitsch, though. He's an expert Muay Thai fighter and trained stuntman who, like Bruce Lee, never appears to inflict the same injury twice. When he sails into a room, as if by slingshot, your blood pressure rises. The filmmakers are smart enough to slow down the shots so that when Jaa's foot lands on a head, the impact is impressive. Watching him demolish a warehouse full of skateboarding, rollerblading X-Gamers seems redundant, though. He's the only real extreme here.


The plot in your average martial arts flick is never more than an a thin excuse to get the hero mad enough to kick ass. But I've never come across one as exotically ludicrous as ''You killed my father and stole my elephant!'' That's what sends Cam (Tony Jaa) from his native Thailand, where he raised sacred pachyderms, to Australia, to settle the score. It's silly, at times laughable, sure, but Jaa has a reckless, bone-cracking grace that transcends the film's triviality. For fight fans, he's worth the price of admission.

 “The Protector” concerns a transsexual dragon lady (Jin Xing) who absconds to Australia with a sacred baby elephant from Thailand, and the efforts of Kham (Tony Jaa), a provincial guardian, to bust skulls and get it back. This is achieved through flabbergasting deployments of Muay Thai, a martial arts discipline in which force is concentrated in the torso and released through the knees, elbows and shoulders. The effect is scrappier than the traditional kung-fu movie moves, with their balletic flurry of the extremities, but the proletarian righteousness is pure classicism. Ditto the “whu-pssht!” thwack for each body blow.  Directed by Prachya Pinkaew from a screenplay reducible to a single exclamation (“You stole my elephant!”), “The Protector” supersizes the formula of “Ong Bak,” his previous film starring Mr. Jaa’s muscles. The grimy street vibe of that picture, in which our hero went muy Muay Thai on the folks who desecrated his village temple, has been cleaned up by the producers, who have budgeted for elephants, explosions, speedboats, helicopters, high-end Jacuzzis, C.G.I. interludes and extreme sports montages.  The American distributor has added its own polish by partially dubbing the dialogue into English and slapping one of the most meaningless phrases in the language — “Presented by Quentin Tarantino” — above the credits. This tinkering inadvertently fortifies the theme of third-world exploitation but does little to distract from the pleasure of watching Mr. Jaa hurl himself willy nilly at an onslaught of randomly generated foes (the swordsman, the Capoeira dude, the bodybuilder, the in-line skater wielding a fluorescent light bulb).  “The Protector” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for pervasive video-game violence.

A correction was made to this review on Jan. 17, 2006.
Thai martial arts star Tony Jaa comes out of his corner with bone-crunching power in "Tom-Yum-Goong," a socko action follow-up to "Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior" that has everything but a decent script and involving lead perf. Boasting the same refreshing avoidance of CGI and wire work as "Warrior," slickly made production (largely by the same team) is more consciously aimed at the international market, with its Australian setting and multilingual dialogue. Muscular biz looks likely among chopsocky fans, though Jaa's machine-like screen persona and pic's lack of mollifying humor, compared with classic Hong Kong product, could limit broader appeal.

Much-anticipated title was released in most key Asian markets (apart from Japan) last August, taking a reportedly massive 300 million baht ($7.5 million) in its native Thailand and a handsome but not boffo HK$11.6 million ($1.5 million) in Hong Kong. European debut is Feb. 8 in France, where it will open in a version some 15 minutes shorter than the original. No date has been announced for release Stateside, where it goes out via the Weinstein Co.
Ancillary looks to be especially strong, as most Asiaphiles will want the original 110-minute version. However, so far film is available only on an unsubtitled Thai DVD and a Chinese-dubbed Hong Kong VCD (reviewed here). Stringent precautions have been taken against local piracy, and pic even contains a fleeting scene in which a passer-by castigates her b.f. for buying a bootlegged movie.
Opening two reels -- beautifully shot and scored, but leisurely paced -- introduce Kham (Jaa), a country lad who grows up with two elephants and is taught muay thai 
martial arts by his dad. Alas, when dad enters a selection process to have his elephants presented to the king, underworld heavies kidnap the two pachyderms.
At the 18-minute mark, pic suddenly cranks into action, with an explosive fight in a restaurant where Kham has traced the villains, followed by a speedboat chase that's a showcase of zippy staging and editing. Upshot is that Kham finds the Dumbos have been shipped Down Under.
Cut to Sydney, two weeks later, and Kham arrives armed with only a picture of a restaurant, Tom-Yum-Goong, in Thai Town. All paths gradually lead to transsexual Madame Rose, played with relish by former Shanghai Ballet star (and real-life transsexual) Jin Xing.
Highlight of what's basically a string of fight scenes comes at the hour mark: a jaw-dropping four-minute single take, with the steadicam almost a partner in the action, in which Kham battles his way up a luxurious four-story brothel, disposing of 30 heavies along the way.
With almost zero character detail, film starts to become repetitive in its second half, despite the inventive fight choreography (enhanced by bone-snapping sound effects) and Jaa's genuine skills (unenhanced by special effects). The final showdown, in which Kham individually takes on 50 of Madame Rose's black-suited bodyguards, is a show-stopper.
Jaa, 30, combines the gymnastics agility of Jackie Chan with the physical intensity of Bruce Lee. But so far, he fatally lacks an involving screen persona and any sense of humor.
As in "Ong-Bak," the color comes from the supports, especially Phettkai Wongkamlao as an ethnic local cop; unfortunately, Wongkamlao's English delivery is far from clear at times. Jin is aces as the Fu Manchu-like villainess, though isn't given a fitting fight finale. Bongkod Kongmalai is pretty but bland as Pla, a whore who shelters Kham.
With an enhanced budget, tech package is considerably smoother than that of "Ong-Bak." Pic's title is also the name of a well-known Thai dish, a hot-and-sour shrimp soup.
