 Snappy repartee with the ring of real conversation among people who are never at a loss for a remark is something every self-respecting Manhattan sophisticate imagines can be channeled into a screenplay with the crackle of vintage Woody Allen. That elusive tone is sustained through enough of Maria Maggenti’s film “Puccini for Beginners” to make it a rarity.  The movie, a screwball comedy of sexual confusion with lesbian inclinations, photographed in digital video all over Manhattan, comes more than a decade after Ms. Maggenti’s promising debut, “The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love.” It captures the neurotic self-absorption of a class of academic and literary New Yorkers who put enormous stock in precisely verbalizing every opinion and emotion, using terms like “paradigm shift.”  At the same time, it carries off the difficult feat of making this tiny segment of the chattering class more or less likable. Compared with these intellectually refined people, the characters in “Will & Grace” and “Sex and the City” are crude, materialistic boors.  It all looks easy when it’s carried off this smoothly. But as any number of stilted duds can attest, applying a Philip Barry or Woody Allen sensibility to 21st-century New Yorkers in their 30s is as delicate a craft as diamond cutting. It’s even riskier when you begin with a premise as debatable as the theory mouthed by the movie’s narrator and main character, Allegra (Elizabeth Reaser): that sexual identity is a “totally old-fashioned concept.”  A writer of obscure novels who lives somewhere in downtown Manhattan, Allegra has this revelation while on the rebound from her relationship with Samantha (Julianne Nicholson), a lover who abruptly leaves her to be with a man (Brian Letscher). Samantha’s farewell is accompanied by a list of the usual grievances; Allegra is savvy enough to recognize as legitimate the charge that she was withholding and passive-aggressive.  Before long, Allegra is distracted from her heartbreak by Philip (Justin Kirk), an assistant professor of philosophy at Columbia whom she drunkenly flirts with at a party, and who is undeterred by her assertion that she is a lesbian and that even if she sleeps with him, he can expect nothing to come of it. In bed, they discover they have sizzling chemistry, and Philip, whose six-year relationship with another woman has lost its spark, separates from her to pursue Allegra.  Mr. Kirk, who played a similarly articulate 30-something nice guy with quirks in the recent “Flannel Pajamas,” owns this emerging urban stereotype: a reasonable, fairly attractive, well-educated straight man who bends over backward to be a reliable, understanding mate and fails despite his best intentions.  A Woody Allen scenario turns into Noël Coward when Allegra meets blond, high-strung Grace (Gretchen Mol) coming out of a movie (“Holiday”), and the two strike up a friendship with a flirtatious undertow. Unbeknown to Allegra, Grace is Philip’s soon-to-be-ex. When they meet again, Grace impulsively throws herself at Allegra; again chemistry sizzles. As Allegra proceeds to juggle her two lovers, she becomes intoxicated with her sexual power. Grace is the least developed member of the triangle; all we learn about her is that she is studying glass blowing.  What unfolds is a modern bedroom farce in which inconvenient cellphone calls to Allegra from both Philip and Grace and her lame cover-ups take the place of closet doors hiding the lovers of cheating spouses. There is an inevitable moment of reckoning.  The comic structure is buttressed by familiar tropes. There is a divided Greek chorus, one half of which is a pair of Japanese sushi chefs who comment (over subtitles) on Allegra’s assignations. The other half consists of Allegra’s two best friends: Nell (Tina Benko), her haughty, acid-tongued lover before Samantha, and Molly (Jennifer Dundas), a lonely part-time caterer. As in Woody Allen films, peripheral people occasionally turn to the camera and mouth off.  The key to Allegra, in whom Ms. Reaser finds a satisfying mixture of self-centeredness and sympathy, is her passion for opera. A major drama queen, she swoons over a scene from “Turandot,” unaware that her friends are nodding out with boredom. After the performance, Allegra announces her theory that “Turandot” is both misogynist and feminist. Even among New York operagoers, I suspect, only a minuscule percentage would come up with such a notion and debate it with so much heat.   

Beyond Beats and Rhymes: A Hip-Hop Head Weighs in on Manhood in Hip-Hop Culture

'Tis Autumn: The Search for Jackie Paris

Clear Cut: The Story of Philomath, Oregon

The Short Life Of Jose Antonio Gutierrez

The Ground Truth: After the Killing Ends

Unfolding Florence: The Many Lives of Florence Broadhurst

Ten years after hitching lesbian teen romance to conventional narrative in "The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love," Maria Maggenti now charts a bisexual romantic triangle in post-feminist, post-p.c. New York. While it tips its hat to screwball comedy, "Puccini for Beginners" owes more to contemporary sitcom. It also has way more in common with "Sex and the City" than "The L Word." None of that is entirely a bad thing in a film that never really soars but has enough breezy humor to land on the specialty theatrical fringe.
Latest entry from the InDigEnt project that spawned "Tadpole," "Pieces of April" and "Personal Velocity," among others, has a number of things going for it. Writer-director Maggenti knows her way around snappy, sophisticated dialogue. In Elizabeth Reaser and Justin Kirk, she has two intelligent, appealing leads who play off each other's brittle edges in amusing ways. And the under-the-radar digital production allows for extensive, loving use of Manhattan locations that usually now get ditched in favor of cheaper Canadian stand-ins.
Reaser plays Allegra, a writer whose inability to surrender to love sends girlfriend Samantha (Julianne Nicholson) careening back to heterosexuality. Feeling sorry for herself at a party soon after, Allegra meets chummy Columbia professor Philip (Kirk) and some drunken flirtation ensues. A second encounter lands them in bed. Despite her dismay when Philip exits his static long-term relationship and campaigns to keep seeing her, Allegra agrees to "a brief, meaningless affair."
Before Maggenti can be accused of entirely forsaking lesbians for has-bians, Allegra slips into a parallel romance with Grace (Gretchen Mol), unaware that she's 
the woman Philip dumped.
Mol is hampered by fuzzy definition of her character -- she has underdeveloped touches of the classic screwball ditz, and her creative blossoming as a glassblower adds little. But ultimately, the actress relaxes into her role as a sweet young woman fumbling for love on the rebound. 
Divided, like the operas that Allegra adores, into three acts with a prologue and epilogue, the comedy playfully orchestrates the inevitable rude awakenings, first for Allegra and then for her unwitting rival lovers. The awkward fix prompts the writer finally to open her eyes and declare her true feelings.
There's nothing especially original going on here, and the laughs are often minor. The film's energy tends to dissipate at times and composer Terry Dame's jaunty score borders on cute, as does Maggenti's overuse of comic devices borrowed from vintage Woody Allen. But as a Sapphocentric comedy about sexual fluidity and self-made obstacles on the path to love, it's an affably ingratiating, reasonably polished entertainment.
Reaser makes more of an impression here than she did in the patchy holiday release "The Family Stone." Allegra conveys jaded intelligence and savvy skepticism, taking wry potshots at herself with her droll theorizing about sexuality and gender politics. But at the risk of betraying the sisters, the comedy sets off the most sparks when Reaser is bouncing off Kirk's easygoing charm. Too bad she couldn't have generated a little more heat with the girls.
 Camera (color, HD), Mauricio Rubinstein; editor, Susan Graef; music, Terry Dame; music supervisor, Jim Black; production designer, Aleta Shaffer; set decorator, Valerie Nolan; costume designer, Antonia Xereas; sound (Dolby Digital), Stuart Deutsch; line producer, Bergen Swanson; assistant director, Solita M. Hanna; casting, Todd Thaler. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 22, 2006. Running time: 82 MIN.
 


 
 


 

One friend short of a forming a lesbian repertory staging of Sex and the City  , Allegra  (Elizabeth Reaser ) does not lack for a sounding board when she replaces one lover with two: straight girl Grace (Gretchen Mol ) and Columbia prof Philip (Justin Kirk ). A Woody Allen  devotee, writer-director Maria Maggenti  hawks an insular view of New York City where poverty doesn't exist to illuminate the grotesque solipsism of her characters. The sensitivity of this artless production is such that every peripheral character is available only to flatter the egos of the story's power dykes, who, given the dimensions of their living quarters, have some nerve accusing each other of being bourgeois. Buying time until Allegra's two-timing is revealed, Maggenti suffocates her story with dated references to every buzzword from Laura Mulvey 's feminist catalog except for "the male gaze.". In short, a nightmare worse than Trust the Man.
