         Russell Brown's engaging first feature, "Race You to the Bottom," provides an illuminating glimpse into some of the more challenging complications that contemporary  relationships can present. Writing and directing with perceptive wit, Brown  adroitly captures the quicksilver shifts in moods  within a tempestuous, passionate romance between two articulate, free-thinking  young people who discover they are not as mature as they thought.
 
 In one of  several deft flashbacks, Brown reveals that Nathan (Cole Williams), a preppy-looking travel writer, and Maggie (Amber Benson), a poli-sci major in search of a career, cross paths at the Mulholland Fountain. The two click, and Nathan offers Maggie his card. When the film opens, they are in the throes of their affair, and Nathan has asked Maggie to join him on a tour of Napa Valley's romantic hot spots  for an article he is writing. It will be the first time they have gone off together; the catch is that both have live-in boyfriends who are under the impression that Nathan and Maggie's relationship is platonic.
 


         






    Maggie is captivated by the confident Nathan, who has a seemingly boundless sense of fun and spontaneity. She experiences a feeling of freedom and exhilaration with him that she has not found with other men. When she  finds herself falling in love,  the trouble starts. Hurt feelings lead to horrible behavior, especially on Nathan's part.
 
 The problem isn't so much that Nathan sees himself as essentially gay but that he has no sense of the responsibilities that real love entails. In the meantime he sees no reason to rein in his gifts as a serial seducer. Maggie as well has considerable growing up to do if their relationship has a prayer of enduring.
 
 Benson is irresistible as Maggie — exquisite, vulnerable yet resilient. Similarly, Williams is consistently persuasive, even when his Nathan is cruel and obnoxious. Maggie and Nathan remain involving, not only because of Benson and Williams but also because Brown has written them as individuals capable of honesty. "Race You to the Bottom" has an ending that is rightly open yet thoroughly satisfying — as is the entire film.
 
 "Race You to the Bottom." MPAA rating: R for sexual content, language and brief drug use. Running time: 1 hour, 16 minutes. Exclusively at the Regent Showcase, 614 N. La Brea Ave., L.A., (323) 934-2944.   


Writer-director Russell Brown's first feature, "Race You to the Bottom," is a well-observed road pic about two mid-20s Angelenos driving up to the Napa Valley for a part-business, part-pleasure weekend that turns out to be mostly painful. Barbed little character study has plenty of modest virtues, but in commercial terms will face an uphill climb: It's a bad heterosexual date movie (more a date-gone-wrong), has too limited a gay angle for that demographic, and is about characters who are not particularly likable as individuals or as a couple.
Though both have boyfriends, Maggie (Amber Benson from "Buffy the Vampire Slayer") and Nathan (Cole Williams of "8 Simple Rules") have been having a secret affair for some months. He invites her along on a travel-writing assignment to visit Napa wineries.
En route they briefly visit her ex-b.f. (Justin Hartley) and best girlfriend (Danielle Harris), now married and "settled down" to uneven satisfaction levels. Left alone with the uber-straight, jockish husband, Nathan scores a conquest sure to have repercussions later on. The visitors then move on to do Ecstasy in San Francisco.
As they proceed farther north, the odd discordant notes grow louder. Dissatisfied with her own boring-nice-guy mate back home, Maggie mulls getting closer to Nathan -- they're good sex partners, and on the same personality plane as rather bratty, snide, self-centered young urbanities. One might say they deserve each other.
But for all his barely sublimated homophobia as a "mostly" gay man who disdains the "gay scene," bisexual Nathan isn't ready to commit to the other side of the fence. Then again, maybe he just can't commit, period. His own b.f. is a tabula-rasa boytoy.Things rapidly degenerate as Nathan's behavior grows more loutish, and Maggie gets more shrill and accusatory. The trip ends with a seemingly permanent rift that wreaks collateral damage on their relationships in Los Angeles. Yet chance-meeting coda a year later suggests duo might not be done with each other yet.
Brown's screenplay and direction, both economical and unshowy, sketch character dynamics in crisp terms that resist the temptation to explain all, beg sympathy or heighten drama for purely histrionic purposes. While some viewers may find lead figures too shallow and irksome -- qualities usually given full play only in supporting roles -- they should strike a chord among auds of the same age, or those who've since outgrown early adulthood's rough edges.
Perfs are solid all around, tech and design contribs sharp. Marco Fargnoli's lensing captures beauty of the surroundings without defusing pic's bite.
Camera (color), Marco Fargnoli; editor, Annette Davey; music, Ryan Beveridge; art director, Doran Meyers; costume designer, Kristen Anacker; sound, Brian O'Hara; assistant director, Barbara Topsoe-Rothenborg; casting, Shannon Makhanian. Reviewed at San Francisco Lesbian & Gay Film Festival, June 24, 2005. Running time: 72 MIN.
 

