That thing. That thing David Mamet   does in his plays and movies. Like in this one, about an L.A. jujitsu instructor (a soulful Chiwetel Ejiofor) with sad eyes and a Spartan code of honor. That thing Mamet does, with blunt guys mouthing off and doing tricky guy deals. (Inevitably, there's some woman being duplicitous.) That thing Mamet does he does again with feverish effing commitment in Redbelt , his effing Rocky . Mamet regulars Ricky Jay and Joe Mantegna blend well with Mamet newbie Tim Allen  , a treat as a spoiled-rotten aging Hollywood action star.

 Correction Appended  In “Redbelt,” David Mamet has taken a sturdy B-movie conceit — a good man versus the bad world, plus blood — tricked it out with his rhythms, his corrosive words and misanthropy, and come up with a satisfying, unexpectedly involving B-movie that owes as much to old Hollywood as  to Greek tragedy. That may sound like a perilous combination, but the film’s visual moderation, contained scale and ambition keep it well tethered. It’s a fight film, purely if not simply, which of course also means it’s about the struggle to live.  There is no struggle initially for Mike Terry (the excellent British actor Chiwetel Ejiofor), an almost messianic Los Angeles jujitsu instructor with a grave sense of purpose. With his  mouthy wife, Sondra (Alice Braga), Mike runs a small Brazilian jujitsu academy in a nondescript part of town. He has money troubles, but also loyal students like Joe (Max Martini, strikingly effective), a cop with financial worries of his own. One evening, after an aggressive, tense class that ends with Joe locked in a chokehold by Mike’s oddly named assistant, Snowflake (Jose Pablo Cantillo), a stranger (Emily Mortimer as Laura) bursts into the academy. A gun discharges and trouble ensues (as it must), along with assorted and progressively contrived complications.  It’s easy to become distracted by these complicating factors, which include a pampered movie star, Chet Frank (Tim Allen); his wife, Zena (Rebecca Pidgeon, a k a Mrs. Mamet); and a producer, Jerry Weiss (Joe Mantegna, a Mamet regular). These characters collide with Mike’s world shortly after he saves Chet from a beating. (The star had gone slumming at a local dive.) Out of gratitude or perhaps curiosity, Chet invites Mike and Sondra to dinner at his mansion, where smiles and promises are served, along with an intoxicating intimation of friendship. In an exuberant moment, Mike tells the dinner party about one of his teaching methods, which requires one student to assume a handicap — say, by having an arm immobilized — before squaring off against an opponent.  His teaching method implies  — or, rather, Mr. Mamet seems to be suggesting — that Mike’s arm is (figuratively)  tied behind his back. On the surface, at least, he appears handicapped by money: a business check has bounced and one of the academy’s  picture windows was shattered when that aforementioned gun went off. Yet Mike’s handicaps don’t register as internal, a function of psychology or a sad historical event; there is no dead kitten in his background,  to invoke Mr. Mamet’s amusing metaphor for speeches that explain a character on the way to the denouement. In “Redbelt” a shot is fired,  a window is broken,  things happen. Action leads to action because, as Mr. Mamet writes in his dead-kitten riff, all that matters is “what happens next.”  That sounds persuasive, particularly if you know that Mr. Mamet is echoing Aristotle’s idea that tragedy is an imitation  of action rather than of character. It’s also fascinating, nevermind that  Aristotle wasn’t talking about how movies work. Even so,  there’s something liberating about Mr. Mamet’s refusal to explain Mike, who registers as a given, much as an object does. Everything about the character exists right on the surface, in his graceful physicality, his sense of honor and his deeds. Mr. Ejiofor, a sympathetic presence with worried eyes, delivers his lines effectively and makes a plausible (at least to this admiring amateur) jujitsu master. He’s a pleasure to watch, even when there’s not much to see,  in the character or on the screen.  That there’s not much to see, or not nearly enough, helps explain why “Redbelt” — the title refers to a belt denoting the pinnacle of expertise   — never marshals its estimable parts, its exciting fight sequences and juicy side characters (playfully played by Ricky Jay, among others) into a transcendent whole. Although he exploits visual symbols effectively, that shattered window included, Mr. Mamet has yet to develop a filmmaking style that is anywhere near as expressive and effective as his writing. “You know the escape, you know the escape,” Mike hypnotically repeats to Joe during his tussle with Snowflake. Some time later, when Mike seems to have surrendered his principles, he will scan the room looking for the escape that, in a fundamental respect, will elude Mr. Mamet.  “Redbelt” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Blood and raw words.

In the story of a purist-minded jiu-jitsu instructor trying to keep his distance from the vulgar commercialism of arena-style martial arts competition, David Mamet may have found the ideal metaphor for his own relationship with mainstream Hollywood. An absorbing and colorful, if not particularly convincing, excursion into a demi-monde of fighters, scammers, promoters and self-styled modern samurai, "Redbelt" gives the impression of Mamet coyly toying with the idea of making a populist little-man-against-the-system sports melodrama without actually attempting to create a film for the masses. Result offers solid midrange specialty-realm potential for this Sony Classics release, which world preemed at the Tribeca fest.
What keeps the film in Mamet rather than "Rocky" territory is that the hero's motivations stem from intellectual and philosophical beliefs, rather than from the emotional need to prove something to himself or a crass desire for fame and fortune. Master jiu-jitsu teacher Mike Terry (Chiwetel Ejiofor), aided by his wife Sondra (Alice Braga), struggles to make ends meet at his small academy in a seedy section of West Los Angeles.
Mike's financial difficulties stem directly from his quasi-holy, anti-mercenary beliefs. Operating in the enormous shadow of the Ultimate Fighting and mixed martial arts phenomenon, Mike defiantly refuses to prep students for such contests. Fond of Eastern-style aphorisms, he insists he does not teach pupils to compete. Rather, "I train people to prevail," adding his belief that, if your mental state is correct, "There is no situation you cannot turn to your advantage."
Mike's attitudes regarding control, one-upsmanship and mental game-playing neatly tie in with motifs Mamet has employed many times before. But while the structure, centered on protags becoming increasingly desperate as successive rugs are pulled out from under their feet, is familiar, the feel is different this time due to the physicality of the milieu.
Downward spiral of events that sucks in numerous characters is triggered by a bizarre moment in which high-strung attorney Laura (Emily Mortimer) happens into Mike's place one evening and accidentally sets off a cop's gun, shattering the storefront's plate glass window. As a courtesy, the cop, Joe (Max Martini), agrees not to report it, but his graciousness sets off a fateful chain of events that, among other things, backs Mike and Sondra up against the financial wall.
At first, Mike thinks he might find his way out of his desperate straits courtesy of movie star Chet Frank (Tim Allen), whose neck he saves one night at a bar. Smothering Mike with gratitude, Chet invites him and his wife to dinner, entices him with a big film job and sends him an expensive watch, while Chet's wife (Rebecca Pidgeon) embraces Sondra as a new partner in a fashion line.
Mike's inherent goodwill soon puts him and Sondra deeper in the hole than ever, leaving them at the mercy of some unsavory underworld types, including a loan shark (David Paymer) and a fight promoter (Ricky Jay). Latter offers Mike a way to clear his debts by entering him in a televised martial arts tournament promising a $50,000 payday.
For a guy like Mike, who even his wife admits is "too pure" for this world, such a sellout is unthinkable. The way Mamet resolves this "art versus commerce" dilemma is almost too clever for the film's own good, suggesting that, considering Mike's view of invariably being able to "prevail" if not "win," you can always find a way to have your cake and eat it too.
Would that this were true, and that the action-packed finale were more convincing and better filmed. Not only is the climactic turn of events unlikely, but the coverage seems as hasty and haphazard as the impromptu event itself, creating an uncertain, tentative feel that emphasizes the story's status as an intellectual fairytale.
Although the dialogue is far from Mamet's pungent, vulgar best, the film is often engaging, thanks to the story's varied social structure, some solid individual scenes and a raft of fine actors playing tasty characters. The always impressive Ejiofor anchors the picture as the stoical Mike, whose values just don't gibe with the omnipresent commercial juggernauts of big-time sports and Hollywood. Allen slips nicely, if unexpectedly, into Mamet's universe as a celebrity accustomed to dealing with people who can be bought, while Jay, Paymer and Joe Mantegna, the latter as Chet's smooth front man, reliably express the familiar moral contours of the everyday world as Mamet sees it.
Camera (Deluxe color, Panavision widescreen), Robert Elswit; editor, Barbara Tulliver; production designer, David Wasco; art director, Ray Yamagata; set designer, Tim Earls; set decorator, Sandy Wasco; costume designer, Debra McGuire; sound (Dolby Digital), Paul Lewis; stunt coordinator, Jack Gill; assistant director, Cara Giallanza; casting, Bialy/Thomas Casting, Sharon Bialy, Sherry Thomas. Reviewed at Sony studios, Culver City, March 12, 2008. (In Tribeca Film Festival -- Gala Premiere.) MPAA Rating: R. Running time: 98 MIN.
 


David Mamet 's Redbelt , which opened the Tribeca Film Festival  last week, is a tricky bar brawl—call it the Roundhouse of Games . The writer-director has scarcely abandoned his sense of the movies as an innately duplicitous medium, one best suited to stories that play out as conspiratorial chess matches. But, with his 10th feature—an entertaining tale of high-stakes martial arts—Mamet has infused the sleight of hand with a measure of two-fisted action.
Understatement is not part of the mix. The rhythm of the rain mixes with the rhythm of the drill as honorable instructor Mike Terry  (Chiwetel Ejiofor ), an exponent of Brazilian jujitsu, teaches his prize pupil, a cop named Joe (Max Martini ), how to fight with one hand bound: "There is no situation from which you cannot escape." This assertive credo makes Mike a promising Mamet-movie protag; that the instructor's pedagogical style is a nonstop torrent of hectoring advice mixed with color commentary suggests the filmmaker's own faith in the power of language. (One of the most truculent literary figures to strut the American stage, Mamet may lack Norman Mailer 's intellectual brawn, but he suffers no deficiency of bluster.)
Still, as played by Ejiofor, Mike is open, straightforward, and almost sweet—a natural victim. His business is going broke, but he's the calmest guy in the room, if not the most honest person on the entire planet. His modest storefront academy, which also houses a fabric business belonging to wife Sondra (Alice Braga ), is an outpost of Zen clarity illuminating a bleak stretch of asphalt somewhere in West Los Angeles. Reality intrudes when an apparent junkie, Laura Black  (Emily Mortimer )—driving through a monsoon menace looking for a drugstore to fill her dubious prescription—dents Mike's parked car. Hysterically bursting into his dojo to apologize, she further freaks upon seeing the cop and, through some arcane form of movie magic, manages to fire his gun through the academy's plate-glass window.
As illogically as this incident plays, it encapsulates the bizarre laws of cause and effect or action and reaction that govern the movie's universe—everyone is at seeming cross-purposes until the final score-settling. Another bait-and-switch caper occurs when Mike visits his brother-in-law's bar to get a bouncer pal some owed back pay and finds himself intervening in a fight to protect a big-time movie star (Tim Allen ) out for a night of carousing . . . perhaps.
Mike and Sondra are subsequently invited to dine at the star's mansion. One needs only a rudimentary familiarity with Mametian paranoia to sense that these suspiciously grateful swells are fitting Mike and the missus for some sort of noose. The Hollywood conspiracy is clinched the next day when Mike visits the set of the star's new movie, nothing less than a re-creation of Operation Desert Storm  produced by the sinister Jerry Weiss  (Mamet axiom Joe Mantegna ). Somehow, they're thinking of bringing on Mike as an executive producer. But is it all a plot to force the honest samurai—who has hitherto been too pure to fight competitively—into the ring?
Cinema is a technology of deceit: No good deed goes unpunished; no bright idea remains unripped off; no one can be trusted. The movie, however, wears its honesty on its sleeve. As a director, Mamet favors unambiguous close-ups and uncluttered interiors; baddies frequent sleek offices, and chaos comes from dark rainy nights. Neither oppressive nor subtle in its symmetries, Redbelt  is a cleanly constructed piece of work. The climactic fight scenes are notable less for their competent orchestration and stolidly ritualized weirdness than for their principled opposition to the HK hijinks of the past two decades.
In press notes so long, detailed, and repetitive they could only have been supervised by Mamet himself, the filmmaker is identified as a longtime student of, and purple belt in, jujitsu. Thus, Redbelt  is a personal statement, as well as a sort of naturalized kung fu western and revisionist Popular Front boxing drama. There's a hint of Golden Boy  (the fighter's innate sensitivity), a few allusions to The Set-Up  (the fighter's desperation, the tawdriness of his final bout), and a line ("Everybody dies") ostentatiously swiped from the quintessential John Garfield flick, Body and Soul —if here contemptuously given to the evil producer.
Like the left-wing, largely Jewish writers of the '30s and '40s, Mamet identifies with the situation of a solitary fighter trapped by a corrupt system. In his case, however, the system isn't capitalism so much as show business. Therein lies a paradox—Mamet attacks showbiz while surrendering to it. The tenets of Brazilian jujitsu may argue there's no trap that cannot be escaped, but the rules of American entertainment insist on it.
