Flying arrows rain down like deadly needles. Soldiers wield their shields in formations worthy of a Busby Berkeley musical. A beautiful woman pours tea with intoxicating precision. There's plenty of vivid action to fill two and a half hours in John Woo's Chinese historical war epic Red Cliff , a rewarding change of terrain and era for the inventive Hong Kong director. The spectacular battle scenes are the engorged heart of the delirious adventure. But Woo also gets maximum romantic value from Tony Leung as a war hero married to Chiling Lin as the tea-pouring beauty.


 In a six-year stretch beginning in 1986, John Woo released a series of balletic, ultraviolent crime thrillers that would rank among the most influential films of the last quarter-century. They took a hyperkinetic, Hong Kong style of action moviemaking out of the grind house and into the art house (and the suburban video store), from which it would eventually become the default mode for any number of big-budget Hollywood directors.  They also set the future course of Hong Kong cinema, taking it away from its martial arts roots and toward the realm of the operatic police procedural.  After “Hard Boiled” in 1992,  Mr. Woo became a Hollywood director himself, making fast-moving but largely forgettable movies. (The best was probably the nukes-on-a-train story “Broken Arrow.”) After “Paycheck” in 2003, he went dark as far as feature films were concerned.  Now he’s back, in two senses: back making movies in Asia and back in theaters with “Red Cliff,” a nearly two-and-a-half-hour historical epic set in the third century A.D. that reunites him with Tony Leung, one of the stars of “Hard Boiled.” It would be nice to report that he’s also back on top of his game, but “Red Cliff,” while handsome and intelligent and perfectly easy to sit through, never really approaches the visceral tug of Mr. Woo’s Hong Kong hits.  Loosely based on the 14th-century Chinese novel “Romance of the Three Kingdoms,” which recounts events in the waning Han dynasty more than a millennium earlier, “Red Cliff” has one of the most familiar of war movie or western setups: the outnumbered good guys scheming to defeat a vastly larger force.  In this case, though, the good guys — a pair of small southern China kingdoms whose forces are led by the viceroy Zhou Yu (Mr. Leung) — number in the tens of thousands, and the bad guys, the Han army led by the megalomaniacal general Cao Cao (Zhang Fengyi), in the hundreds of thousands.  Mr. Woo, who can make romantic poetry out of a battle among 20 men in the confines of a teahouse, seems defeated, or at least defused, by this increase in scale. The battle scenes, which involve vast fleets of mostly computer-generated ships, sky-darkening volleys of arrows and the heroic, self-sacrificial storming of ramparts, are no better or worse than what any number of competent Hollywood (or Chinese) directors can turn out. And it’s not that this sort of large-scale action can’t be infused with feeling — Akira Kurosawa proved that it can in “Kagemusha” and “Ran” not long before  Mr. Woo was making his breakout films.  Watching “Red Cliff,” you realize that Mr. Woo was always best as a miniaturist: the memorable action sequences in movies like “Bullet in the Head” and “Hard Boiled” are a series of tiny, split-second set pieces, a slide down a banister here, a glance between buddies there. “Red Cliff” has a few similar moments, in the byplay between Mr. Leung and Takeshi Kaneshiro as a military strategist and in some of Mr. Leung’s (or his stunt double’s) battlefield acrobatics. But they’re just grace notes amid the grinding mechanics of deploying the troops and moving the story along. (That might not be the case in the five-hour version of the film released in Asia.)  One thing that hasn’t changed since 1992 is the reassuring presence of Mr. Leung, one of the world’s last true matinee idols. His combination of Zen-like calm and wild expressiveness, centered in his pixieish eyes, serves equally well whether he is playing the tortured aesthete for Wong Kar-wai, the murderous bureaucrat for Ang Lee or the action hero for Mr. Woo. Not even body armor and an ancient helmet, let alone a cast of thousands, can contain him.  “Red Cliff” is rated R (under 17  requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for death by arrow, lance and sword.

One of the most ballyhooed Asian productions in recent history, and the most expensive Chinese-language picture ever, John Woo's costume actioner "Red Cliff" scales the heights. First seg of the two-part, $80 million historical epic -- with "The Battle of Red Cliff" to follow in late January -- balances character, grit, spectacle and visceral action in a meaty, dramatically satisfying pie that delivers on the hype and will surprise many who felt the Hong Kong helmer progressively lost his mojo during his long years stateside. Pic may, however, disappoint those looking for simply a costume retread of his kinetic, '80s H.K. classics. 
Film is pitched more at an older demographic than traditional Asian youth auds, and the July 10 release (in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea) faces heavy competition from other summer titles after its first frame. But robust initial returns point to the two-parter putting black ink on most investors' ledgers - apart, maybe, from Japanese investor Avex, who bankrolled more than half the budget. Non-Asian returns look to be much smaller, especially as in the West the whole 4 1/2-hour movie will be available only in a single, 2 1/2-hour version that could end up losing much of the character detail that motors the production.
Detailing an incident familiar to auds throughout Asia, the script by Woo and three other writers mixes elements from history (as recorded in a third-century chronicle by Chen Shou), the freely fictionalized classic "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" by 14th-century scribe Luo Guanzhong and their own filmic imagination into a dramatic stew that has engendered beaucoup debate among Asian specialists and auds who already have their own ideas about the characters from multiple comicbook treatments, TV drama series and school textbooks. However, given that these often contradict each other - even down to details of who were the good and bad guys -- pic always faced an uphill battle pleasing everyone.
But the picture indisputably works on its own terms. Though this first part is a long warm-up to the part two naval battle on the Yangtze River that saw the forces of the North rebuffed by those of the South, it contains more than enough action and drama to justify its length, as well as a cliffhanger ending that leaves auds hungry for more.
Yarn opens in summer AD 208, with prime minister-cum-general Cao Cao (powerful mainland Chinese vet Zhang Fengyi) asking permission from Han dynasty Emperor Xian (Wang Ning) to lead an expedition south to take on "rebellious" warlords Liu Bei (You Yong) and Sun Quan (Taiwan thesp Chang Chen). Jittery mood in the imperial court sets the stage for the political machinations that marble the whole movie -- and forecasts the period of turmoil, known as the Three Kingdoms, that followed the imminent collapse of the 400-year-old Han dynasty.
Socko 20-minute action sequence, as Cao Cao's massive army sweeps south and meets Liu's forces in the Battle of Changban, establishes the gritty, chaotic tone of the movie's land warfare. Cool, almost grungy color processing, and action that's exaggerated but not manga-like, are underpinned by ace art director Tim Yip's realistic costumes and design. There's no clear sense of geography in the skirmishes, but maybe that's the point.
As Liu & Co. lick their wounds after their retreat, Liu's canny strategist, Zhuge Liang (Takeshi Kaneshiro) proposes an alliance between him and Sun Quan vs. Cao Cao's seemingly unstoppable forces. Pic's second act broadens here, establishing the nervous, indecisive character of Sun Quan, his tomboyish sister, Sun Shangxiang (lively mainland babe Vicki Zhao) -- and last but not least, Sun Quan's commander, Zhou Yu (Hong Kong heartthrob Tony Leung Chiu-wai).
The appearance, 40 minutes in, of toplined Leung (a last-minute replacement for Chow Yun-fat) adds some real emotional heft to the drama. Though not the most physically imposing thesp in the cast, Leung is easily the subtlest, and the character's musical interests add extra layers to what, until then, has been simply a sturdy historical actioner.
Main cast has few weak links and traverses all shades of character. Zhang and Leung dominate the movie, while Kaneshiro is fine as wily strategist Zhuge and Zhao adds welcome humor as the feisty princess. Chang is a tad lightweight in such company as the wimpish Sun, and Taiwanese super-model Lin Chi-ling mostly decorative as Zhou's wife. Multitude of colorful supports is led by Mongolian actor Basenzabu as a warrior who's a one-man moving mountain.
Dark-toned color processing doesn't glamorize the period and adds gravitas to many of the youthful actors. Japanese composer Taro Iwashiro's multi-faceted score -- brazzy, playful, lyrical by turns -- adds real dramatic clout throughout. Visual effects are just OK.
Version caught in South Korea (cut by local distrib-investor Showbox) was nine minutes shorter than that shown in Chinese-speaking territories, with a couple scenes shortened, including a calligraphy sequence prior to Zhou making love to his wife. Japanese version, to be released later this year, will also be shorter than Woo's 140-minute cut.

John Woo  spent a decade navigating the big-studio minefield—longer than most foreign auteurs last in Hollywood  before throwing in the towel. Beginning in earnest with an above-average Jean-Claude Van Damme  programmer (Hard Target ), Woo then produced one decent facsimile of his hyperkinetic Hong Kong neo-noirs (Face/Off ), rose to the gilded heights of a Tom Cruise  tentpole picture (Mission: Impossible II ), and finally bottomed out in 2003 with the fittingly titled Philip K. Dick  adaptation Paycheck . The John Woo who made that movie seemed spiritually broken and creatively spent—a shadow of the action maestro whose innovative Sam Peckinpah /Jean-Pierre Melville mash-ups, The Killer  and Hard Boiled , had made an icon out of Chow Yun-Fat  and been enshrined by a generation of burgeoning film students.
Woo returned to China—the Mainland—to make his latest film, but scale back he didn't. Conceived as a two-film epic with a combined running time of nearly five hours (reduced to a single two-and-a-half-hour version for extra-Asian consumption), Woo's Red Cliff  is the most expensive movie ever produced in the country, and also the biggest—a third-century battle royale, with phalanxes of horsemen and armadas of battleships stretching as far as the eye can see (and, thanks to the CGI paintbox, even farther). The source material is an 800,000-word historical novel, Romance of the Three Kingdoms , written in the 14th century and as deeply embedded in Chinese folklore as Shakespeare 's characters are in the West—rooted in fact, but transfigured over time into something more mythic. And although Woo also turned to the more historically accurate text Chronicles of the Three Kingdoms  for inspiration, watching Red Cliff  feels like being in the presence of gods who have momentarily deigned to walk upon the earth.
The story is pure David and Goliath: Weakened by corruption and civil war, the Han Dynasty has fallen under the sway of a Machiavellian prime minister, Cao Cao  (Zhang Fengyi ), who persuades the ineffectual emperor to wage war against a pair of "insurgent" warlords, Liu Bei  (You Yong) and Sun Quan  (Crouching Tiger  star Chang Chen ). Prodded by Liu Bei's dandyish military strategist Zhuge Liang  (a delightful Takeshi Kaneshiro ), and despite a healthy mutual distrust, the two warlords form a tentative alliance and, outnumbered by several hundred thousand, prepare to face off against Cao Cao's imperial army at the titular Yangtze River  locale. If you don't know what happens, far be it from me to spoil it for you.
In either version, Red Cliff  (which surpassed Titanic  to become China's all-time box-office champ) is a grand, old-fashioned spectacle, with massive armies wreaking massive havoc in strategically ingenious ways. Early on, Sun Quan's tomboy sister (Zhao Wei ) and her coterie of fiercely armed handmaidens lead Cao Cao's forces into a raging sandstorm, where they are in turn blinded by the reflective shields of the rebel soldiers. Later, Cao Cao retaliates by turning the corpses of his typhoid-infected ranks into primitive dirty bombs. And, in one of the most storied episodes of Three Kingdoms  lore (and one of the film's most dazzling set pieces), the weather-sensitive Zhuge uses the onset of a thick fog to trick the enemy into gifting his ammo-deprived forces with thousands of recyclable arrows.
Shorn by nearly half, the "international" version of Woo's film—or, as I like to call it, Red Cliff for Dummies —may not be a murdered masterpiece on the order of Heaven's Gate  and Once Upon a Time in America , but it's unquestionably a lesser thing: saddled with an introductory voiceover; plastered with supertitles identifying individual characters (which actually have the effect of making the name game more  confusing); and, most egregiously, stripped of most of the quieter, character-building scenes that are precisely what are needed to give non-Asian audiences a sense of why these events and their participants have loomed so long and so large in the collective Chinese consciousness. At the risk of advocating movie piracy, I strongly encourage you to purchase the widely available Chinese DVD.
Still, all is not lost: In both cuts, Red Cliff  exudes a physical grandiosity that few movies of the past 20 years have attempted—no matter that Woo, even at his best, is still more at ease with down-and-dirty action than epic pageantry. And then there is Woo's Hard Boiled  co-star, Tony Leung Chiu Wai , one of the last of the world's great movie stars, here at his most balletic as Sun Quan's magisterial viceroy, Zhou Yu . Perhaps it's too coy to suggest that, in the giant-slaying resolve of these underdog warriors, Woo saw something of an analog for his own recent career. In any event, he lives to fight another day.
