Amid the stillness in Götz Spielman's "Revanche," there is surprise. Not so much the narrative kind  - although this intimately drawn crime-melodrama has that  - but physical. The camera moves in on a face at some point, and it's breathtaking, since, until that point, it hadn't moved much at all. Spielman builds his film from a flow of steady, deliberate action.
"Revanche" begins in Vienna, where a woman arrives at a man's apartment. They share a shower (sensual), then a pizza (less so), and discuss how broke she is (least). We eventually learn that he is Alex (Johannes Krisch) and she is Tamara (Irina Potapenko), and that they really care for each other. She makes a phone call (in Russian) and does some cocaine. They put on their clothes and proceed to their respective jobs at the same brothel. She turns tricks. He turns down beds and does some bouncing. Their boss tells Tamara he wants to upgrade her out of the brothel into a private room that would essentially make her his. The boss doesn't know Alex and Tamara are lovers.
If the slicked back hair, ratty mustache, and generally coarse demeanor didn't give Alex away, we'd know he has a past. Indeed, he was in jail for thievery. And in trying to get Tamara some independence from her boss, he winds up imperiling them both. They hit the road, and, against her wishes, he robs a bank in a sleepy Austrian town. The robbery goes wrong, and soon Alex has fled, without Tamara, to his grandfather's country farm, where the movie's tenor changes. Alex's too. He's now taciturn, spiteful, guilty-looking, desperate to get revenge against whoever foiled his getaway. He's short with his widowed grandfather (Hannes Thanheiser), a gangly, patient old man who feeds his cows and plays the accordion.
Spielman remains vague about what's next, but he keeps us curious, and the less explained the better. Suffice it to say that the grandfather's yuppie neighbor, Susi (Ursula Strauss), continues to check in on him, neglecting to burden him with her own marital woes. Her husband, Robert (Andreas Lust), was the lone officer at the scene of the robbery and he hasn't been right since. And her mother wants to know when she can expect a grandchild. But Susi's niceness remains. When Alex tells her rather abruptly never to come back to his grandfather's, she looks hurt but makes an unexpected counteroffer.
The movie's element of surprise emanates from how these characters behave, how they ache, and how their ache is tied to matters of conscience and acts of regret. It doesn't ruin much to say that Alex holds Robert responsible for botching his clean getaway that afternoon and wants to make him pay. Robert, of course, is wracked with his own post-traumatic stress.
All the stillness, particularly in the country, where Alex chops wood with erotic abandon, implies a kind of anticipation. You're lured in by seemingly placid shotmaking then knocked out by what transpires within the frame. The strangers we meet in the first hour have become far more fascinating to us by the second, mostly without the film divulging much. We have to wait for Spielman to unspool his story and guide us to where it's headed. He's too smart a storyteller to tell us everything. The screenplay overreaches to connect characters, but his offbeat visual touch legitimizes the contrivances.
"Revanche" was a foreign-language Oscar nominee this year, and it's a better movie than most of the films in the main race. The word "revanche" means "revenge" in German, but "waiting" would have been just as good. The passing days begin to both dispel and enrich Alex's thirst for revenge. "Revanche" presents a world in which one man's wrenched fury can be another's rationalizing balm.
There's a moral beauty in the movie's consideration of violence and vengeance. A man can accept a moment of true clarity even if it's from someone who doesn't know you've planned to kill him.

 Correction Appended  A nominee for best foreign-language film at this year’s Oscars, Götz Spielmann’s “Revanche” is a tidy, glum thriller that aims for a tone of sour humanism, perched just on the near edge of cynical despair. Traveling from a decidedly unromantic Vienna to a weary-looking but still picturesque stretch of Austrian countryside, the film also spans the distance from lower-depths realism to moral fable.  Or tries to, at any rate. Mr. Spielmann seems to be after a combination of starkness and psychological complication, and the result is a pileup of motives and implications that undermine the blunt impact of the story. But the characters and situations are interesting enough, and the filmmaking is sufficiently skilled to provide a measure of reasonably thoughtful entertainment.  Like many other recent international art films — notable examples include Ulrich Seidl’s “Import/Export,” also from Austria, and Ozcan Alper’s “Autumn,” from Turkey — “Revanche” features an Eastern European prostitute, thus raising the audience’s awareness of global sex trafficking while conveniently satisfying its desire for a beautiful naked woman to ogle. Tamara (Irina Potapenko) works in a Viennese brothel and spends her spare time with her lover, Alex (Johannes Krisch), an underworld small-timer, more gofer than gangster. Alex is clearly out of his league, but part of what appeals to Tamara about him is that he is an unambitious, unthreatening loser, and therefore as close to a nice guy as she is likely to find.  But when she is offered a promotion — with some ugly strings attached, most likely — Alex tries to reinvent himself as a gallant outlaw, a knight errant who will use his criminal wiles to rescue his beloved from evil. His plans go horribly, inevitably wrong, in a way that is both surprising and genuinely upsetting — the single moment when “Revanche” achieves some real emotional force.  After that it settles down into a moderately diverting psychodrama about a city mouse exiled to the country, where the inhabitants include a crusty old codger and an anxious policeman and his bored, sex-hungry wife. The performances are solid, and the film as a whole works as a modest, satisfying little crime story. Nothing exceptional, though such movies are perhaps rarer these days than they used to be.

Two couples -- one from the city, the other from the countryside -- are bound together by fate in Austrian writer-director Goetz Spielmann's taut thriller "Revanche." Elegantly spinning primal elements of guilt, revenge, faith and redemption, helmer's gripping fifth feature is prime fest material that's likely to rate Euro arthouse exposure, with further viewers in ancillary. Like his previous "Antares," it also contains scenes of graphic sexuality. Pic won the Europa Cinemas Label for best Euro film in Berlin's Panorama sidebar.
In Vienna's demi-monde, ex-con Alex (Johannes Krisch) serves as a flunky for sleazy brothel owner Konecny (Hanno Poeschl) while secretly carrying on an affair with Ukrainian prostitute Tamara (Irina Potapenko). Meanwhile, in a small village some hours away that's home to Alex's elderly grandfather (Hannes Thanheiser), athletic cop Robert (Andreas Lust) and shopkeeper wife Susanne (Ursula Strauss) live a rural idyll in which they lack only offspring.
When Alex, in disguise, robs a bank in Robert's village, the fallout connects them in complex ways. Afterward, taking refuge on his grandfather's farm at the edge of the woods, Alex finds his gnawing despair leavened by the old man's simple work ethic -- and friendly neighbor Susanne's warm optimism.
Stillness and sounds of nature play a key role in creating pic's intense atmosphere. Eschewing a music track makes a scene in which the grandfather finds joy playing his beloved accordion again especially poignant. Asking the question, "Whose fault is it if life doesn't go your way?," the cleverly constructed script introduces some fresh and surprising twists and turns.
In what's essentially a six-hander, the casting is aces. All actors turn in fine, naturalistic perfs, but it would be remiss not to remark on 83-year-old Thanheiser's profoundly moving turn as the grandfather.
Impressive lensing from Martin Gschlacht, the key cinematographer for Austria's young helmers, provides simplicity and clarity, while concise cutting by Karina Ressler allows no gratuitous moments in a pic that clocks in at just over two hours. With "Revanche" his strongest work yet, Spielmann creates high expectations for the future.
Camera (color), Martin Gschlacht; editor, Karina Ressler; production designer, Maria Gruber; costume designer, Monika Buttinger; sound (Dolby Digital), Heinz Ebner; sound editor, Bernhard Bamberger; casting, Rita Waszilovics. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama Special), Feb. 11, 2008. Running time: 121 MIN.
 



An unidentified object sends ripples across the surface of a lake at the start of Götz Spielmann's Revanche , and in the two hours it takes the movie to loop back to that crucial moment, we see another set of shockwaves, set forth by a bank robbery in a bucolic Austrian country town. The robbery is committed by Alex (Johannes Krisch ), a proletariat lug working for a cheap-suited pimp in Vienna 's red-light district, who dreams of absconding to Ibiza  with a Ukranian call girl (Irina Potapenko ) equally eager to escape from the pimp's thuggish clutches. It is, Alex says, in the way of all movie small-timers trying to get rich quick, a foolproof heist—and so it might be, were it not for Robert (Andreas Lust ), the provincial cop who happens to be patrolling the street where Alex illegally parks his stolen getaway car, and who fires the fateful shot that violently upends Alex's perfect plan.
Alex takes cover at his elderly grandfather's nearby farm, which turns out to abut the property of Robert and his wife, Susanne (Ursula Strauss )—a coincidence that might have seemed like a cheap provocation in a lesser film, but which Spielmann deploys with the cool inevitability of a Greek tragedian. It's the untidiness of human relationships, however, more than the moral reckoning that drives Revanche , which was one of the few deserved nominees in the forlorn Foreign Language category at the last Academy Awards . As Alex seethes with vengeful thoughts, he finds himself unexpectedly drawn to Susanne, and soon realizes that he is not the botched robbery's only collateral victim. The shooting and its ensuing investigation has also taken its toll on Robert, and in turn formed fissures in his marriage—or maybe (as an empty upstairs nursery suggests) magnified ones that were already there. When cop and robber finally meet again, it is not in a violent standoff, but rather a dialectic.
Directed with terrific control and economy of means by Spielmann—a film and theater vet who has had only one previous movie distributed in the U.S.—Revanche  gets its hooks into you early and leaves them there, alternately suggesting a darkly romantic film noir in the vein of Nicholas Ray 's On Dangerous Ground  (which navigates a similar journey from seedy urbanism to lyric countryside), a Strindbergian chamber play opened up for the great outdoors, and a Jacobean revenge drama stripped of its ceremonial bloodshed. Working with the cinematographer Martin Gschlacht , Spielmann favors fixed, spacious compositions, in which the action often drifts to the far corners of the frame, until we find ourselves craning our necks as if to peer around the edges of the screen. He's also marvelous with actors, particularly Krisch, a stage performer playing his first major screen role here. An intensely physical presence, Krisch can make vivid business out of scaling a wall or somersaulting across a bed to answer the door, but he is even more adept at registering the rage and resignation that pass behind Alex's eyes as he stares out into the horizon, weighing his fate.
