f you like your antiheroes tall, pale and existential, you won't do better than Georges, the anti-czarist assassin at the heart of Karen Shakhnazarov's historical drama "Rider Named Death." Georges, played by the steely-eyed Siberian actor Andrei Panin, is a thinly veiled fictional version of Boris Savinkov, a Socialist agitator who wrote an autobiographical novel, "The Pale Horse," on which the film's story is based. Georges leads a ragtag band of terrorists in Moscow at the turn of the 20th century, each member motivated by a different set of principles. Erna (Ksenia Rappoport) makes bombs, driven by a fanatical passion for the cruel and distant Georges. Vanya (Artyom Semakin) is a wide-eyed student, a Christian idealist who refuses to bomb an aristocrat's carriage when children are present. Fyodor (Rostislav Bershauer) is a true anarchist, a hardened peasant who believes in the dissemination of terror as a general practice. Finally there's Georges, who, if we're to believe the chilling story he tells his married lover, Elena (Anastasia Makeeva), kills for no other reason than sheer boredom. The four take on the project of assassinating the Grand Duke Sergei Aleksandrovich (Vasiliy Zotov), a remote symbol of the aristocracy with whom Georges becomes increasingly obsessed as the group's attempts on his life collapse into chaos. Though Dostoyevsky and Nietzsche are never explicitly invoked in the revolutionaries' desultory musings on fate and individual responsibility, there is an unmistakably philosophical bent to their discussions (often conducted in sumptuous nightclubs over vodka and caviar). The source of the terrorists' financial support is as obscure as the origin of their social outrage, since poverty and oppression are seen only in the abstract. Despite the philosophical burden it assumes, "The Rider Named Death" remains a vaguely political costume drama, an unexceptionable museum piece that takes place in an exquisitely recreated Moscow of nearly a century ago. To make a film in 2005 that asks audiences to sympathize with the plight of a band of terrorists is an intellectually audacious gesture. But "The Rider Named Death" fails to draw, even indirectly, any possible parallels with current unrest, whether in the former Soviet Union or the Middle East. For a film about revolutionary passion and the political uses of violence, it is strangely bloodless.

Based on a novel by notorious pre-Revolutionary Russian terrorist Boris Savinkov, Karen Shakhnazarov's costumer "Rider Named Death" instead of using its hot-button issues as a present-day hook, sticks with a 19th century mindset which it accompanies with elegant turn-of-the-century decors. This exquisite, self-contained curio will doubtless travel far on fest circuit and but the sinister hero, sadly lacking in villainous panache, is unlikely to target any but small-screen distribs Stateside.
Gorgeous set design by Ludmila Kusakova stacks the deck even before the plot kicks in: It would be criminal to destroy such stunning works of art as the raspberry-colored palace of the Grand Duke or blow up a masterful layout where even beggars figure as essential parts of the decor.
Director Shakhnazorov's sumptuous set pieces include one staged in a palatial antechamber where a splendidly garbed, ravishing young woman prettily begs for an audience with a minister and, once admitted to the attentive official's presence, calmly pumps him full of lead.
A more explosive assassination attempt fills the cobblestone streets with screaming horses and swirling black smoke that clears to reveal the casualties. Lastly, in the stately marbled halls of the Bolshoi theater, coincidentally empty of guards, an assassin enters the Grand Duke's box and shoots him at point-blank range, while onstage a lively opera continues without pause.
The conspirators meet in a cavernous cabaret where dancers perform a suggestively choreographed can-can, their hairdos, costumes and clownish poses straight out of Toulouse-Lautrec. Except for George (Andrey Panin), the revolutionists' cold fish of a leader, the rank and file's intensity markedly contrasts with the promiscuous decadence of the overall milieu.
Fydor (Rostislav Bershauer), the peasant of the group, is angered at the inequity of the class system that values a woman's dress at 200 times a worker's daily wage. Heinrich (Aleksey Kazakov) was a university intellectual. Idealist Vanya (Artem Semakin), on the other hand, is positively Dostoyevskian in his mystical, romantic belief in good, evil and salvation. Erna (Ksenia Rappoport), bombmaker extraordinaire, is hopelessly in love with George.
The social-revolutionist cell is first introduced at the cabaret wearing masks, and when George removes his, it uncovers a face so willfully devoid of expression that only the sweat on his brow indicates that there is not yet another mask underneath the first. His face recalls the masked figure in the final segment of Ophuls' "Le Plaisir."
A chilly assassin, voluptuously obsessed with his victim's demise, Panin's George seems more dedicated to death than to justice.Tech credits are top drawer.
Camera (color, widescreen), Vladimir Klimov; editor, Lidia Milioti; music, Anatoly Kroll; production designer, Ludmila Kusakova. Reviewed at Montreal World Film Festival (competing), Sept. 3, 2004. Running time: 106 MIN.
 


Beginning with a slovenly nod to the WWI-era underworld serial Les Vampires  and finishing on the same quote from Revelation that named Elem Klimov's Belorussian death march Come and See , the new Russian film The Rider Named Death  languidly contemplates the chilling seductions of 20th-century violence. Its milieu isn't one we're overacquainted with: 1905 Russia, when the czar and the aristocracy still ruled but the various revolutionary forces and their radical terrorist arms were gathering steam, busily bombing and assassinating officers, dukes, politicos, and diplomats. Based on a semi-autobiographical novel by Boris Savinkov—written in 1909, before the insurrectionary free-for-all came close to coalescing into something much worse—Karen Shakhnazarov's film makes no bones about trying to get under Savinkov's skin.
A cultured political murderer who fought against the anti-Socialist Bolsheviks  after the 1917 revolution and who apparently wrote his book while a fugitive from czarist forces after escaping from custody in 1907, Savinkov must've been a scary, fascinating, white-hot live wire, that rare figure who might justify a full-on historical biopic. (Like the movie's hero, Savinkov fell to his death in 1925 from the window of a Cheka interrogation room—jumped or pushed.) Shakhnazarov's movie doesn't quite rise to the possibilities, preferring a slack narrative line, an oddly underpopulated urban vibe, and an overall air of life-is-cheap detachment. Savinkov's stand-in is Georges (Andrei Panin ), the whispery, gimlet-eyed leader of a motley band of Socialist Revolutionary assassins. In the 23-year run-up to 1917, some 17,000 Russian officials and blue bloods were blown up or shot down by rebel groups, but in The Rider Named Death the killers are bumbling losers, attempting again and again to take out a particular grand duke. Hesitancy, religious debates, ill-made explosives—Georges watches glumly as his mini-army of four continuously fails, leaving him to complete the task and, naturally, ask himself for what, exactly, he's so determined to spill blood.
Like most ostensibly opulent historical epics made in poor countries, the film has an endearingly rough-hewn character, all natural light, filth, second-grade materials, and rooms that seem to have already felt a century of aging. Cutting corners, Shakhnazarov even utilizes compositional strategies from Peter Watkins 's La Commune —but on real Russian streets. All the same, The Rider Named Death  is curiously anemic; rather than passion, outrage, and danger, we're contemplating the sotto voce conspiracy love of a quaintly distant age, when results weren't quite as emotionally important as commitment and camaraderie. Panin, resembling a fusion between Jon Voight  and icy character-actor icon George Macready , is too skilled at coolness and never opens up. Shakhnazarov is no Pontecorvo, and his film isn't interested in reflective politics so much as the melancholy of history, despite the parallels to be drawn to Chechnya  (or, of course, any of several dozen anti-imperialist revolutions ongoing as we speak). Although we sympathize with George and his team of halfasses, never are we shown a second of czarist injustice or poverty, as if the dynamite-happy freedom fighters were embroiled for the sake of abstract ideas and nothing more.
