
''The Roost" is a homespun Halloween attraction loaded into an abandoned barn. It's not about slick production values. It's more about remembering just how little it took to unnerve you as a child.
So keep your big-budget horror movie expectations locked away in a separate crawl space, because this grainy feature debut from writer-director Ti West demands that you buy into the silliness, and the cheese.
The filmmaker even acknowledges/excuses his preference for B-movie style by inserting ''The Roost" within a ''Frightmare Theatre" TV show, complete with a Crypt Keeper-esque host played by horror veteran Tom Noonan.
The unsurprising victims of this impending tragedy are a carload of friends who get stuck in a ditch and are forced to seek help at a nearby farmhouse, where the evening doesn't get any more relaxing.
The house has a barn that is apparently the size of Nebraska, because people wander around in search of one another as though it's some endless maze where even their shouts are trapped.
And who are these innocent prey? There's cynical Brian (Sean Reid), self-involved Trevor (Karl Jacob), and the wholesome brother-sister combo of Elliot (Wil Horneff) and Allison (Vanessa Horneff, his real-life sibling).
West gets an enthusiastic round of applause for trusting his eye for stripped-down horror. Now he needs to complete the picture with writing that shows the same conviction.

         "The Roost," writer-director Ti West's homage to low-budget '70s horror movies, places a premium on tension while taking a fresh bite out of the old vampire-bat tale. Full of genuine scares and impressively disturbing effects, the film follows the travails of a quartet of young people stranded on a stormy Halloween night in the Pennsylvania countryside who discover that traffic might not be such a bad thing.
 
  Taking a shortcut on a rural road, Elliot (Wil Horneff), Trevor (Karl Jacob), Brian (Sean Reid) and Allison (Vanessa Horneff) strike something that appears to be a large bat, leaving their car in a ditch. They wander to a nearby farmhouse, where they discover the barn to be a haven for a colony of winged, furry flying things, and bad things begin to occur, foreshadowed by an unsettlingly furious flapping sound.
 


         






    West punctuates the action with a framing device, featuring the understated Tom Noonan as the ghoulish host of a late-night television horror program, which is initially effective but eventually wears out its welcome.
 
  The film was executive produced and includes a cameo by cult filmmaker Larry Fessenden ("Habit," "Wendigo"), though it lacks the quirky subversiveness of Fessenden's revisionist horror films and feels stretched beyond capacity at 80 minutes. West and his collaborators, cinematographer Eric Robbins, sound designer Graham Reznick and composer Jeff Grace, however, know how to craft a scary tale and mine their limited budget for maximum chills.
 
 "The Roost,"
 unrated. Running time: 1 hour, 20 minutes. At Laemmle's Fairfax, 7907 Beverly Blvd., L.A., (323) 655-4010.   

 With a framing device reminiscent of Tom Holland's "Fright Night" and a hyperactive score, "The Roost" is a minimalist horror movie with more ambition than resources. Lovingly written and directed by Ti West, a novice filmmaker drunk on splatter and decomposing flesh, the movie treads a well-worn path as four friends (Karl Jacob, Sean Reid and real-life siblings Wil and Vanessa Horneff) find themselves stranded at a farmhouse in the middle of nowhere. There are bats in the barn, zombies under the floorboards and more agitated strings on the soundtrack than on a Celine Dion album. But the rules of the genre are clear: form a line and prepare to be slaughtered. Though the premise is rough, and the acting rougher - most members of the cast improve enormously as soon as gore is substituted for dialogue - "The Roost" proceeds with such youthful enthusiasm that its rawness is more charming than annoying. (Less appealing are the television-friendly breaks that halt the action at crucial moments.) Creatively shot and framed by the cinematographer Eric Robbins, who constructs gorgeously lighted centerpieces surrounded by strips of menacing black, the movie almost overcomes its low budget and threadbare plot. Almost.

A movie with bats in its belfry, "The Roost" celebrates and restores the 1970s B-horror pic with zero gloss and terrific, rough-hewn craft. Imagining what happens when a group of young people en route to a friend's wedding get sidetracked at a farm taken over by vampire bats, debuting helmer Ti West taps into the realist-horror spirit of mentor and exec producer Larry Fessenden, and makes a scarier pic than any by his master. Distrib Vitagraph should have no problem finding eyeballs for horror fare this genuinely creepy. Future midnight haunts are a lock.
Framed by a TV host intro, intermission and exit (played cheekily by Tom Noonan in full Igor garb), pic manages to mostly survive this arch and ultimately distracting device that finally provides one scary ending too many.
Heart of the matter is a foursome, including brother and sister Elliott and Allison (actual siblings Wil and Vanessa Horneff), friend Trevor (Karl Jacob) and somewhat distant and grouchy friend Brian (Sean Reid), all in a car on a dark country road on Halloween. Their trip is suddenly halted by something that crashes into car, leaving them stranded.
A cut to an elderly farm couple (Richard Little, Barbara Wilhide) who go a bit too far into their enormous adjacent barn generates effective suspense. Pic's first sighting of the cavernous interior sets the tone for the rest of the film, which extracts maximum benefit from the absence of light (worked with considerable inventiveness by lenser Eric Robbins) and the suggestive power of sound (magnificently recorded and designed by Graham Reznick).
It's this same farm that's closest to the group's car, and after they trudge through pitch darkness, the place's homey atmosphere appears to be a safe haven. West's script wastes little time dallying with character development, neatly establishing a rift between Brian, who insists on staying near the light, and Elliott and Trevor, who search for help.
After the murky open spaces of the early scenes, action shifts to the vast barn, which conveys a similar physical effect as "2001: A Space Odyssey's" huge, tomb-like space station -- only with the lights turned off. What was once used by humans as, among other things, a pen for animals now becomes the ideal hunting space by animals upon humans -- a concept that West ingeniously mines.
Even the inevitable process of characters being picked off one by one never feels tedious thanks to smart breaks in the action --though one of them (a TV time-out) stops the movie cold.
Since the bat victims pop back to life as zombies, survivors are in a real mess. As a sly joke, Fessenden emerges at the end as a tow-truck driver who turns into bat food. A double-dose of shock effects at the close is excessive and easily trimmed.
West takes advantage of his low budget every step of the way, including a cast of mostly unknowns who never feel like they're recycling old horror chestnuts, and whose unfamiliarity only turns the suspense screws tighter.
The sole concern left by "The Roost" is if West can resist the inevitable Hollywood offers for bigger-scaled genre projects and follow Fessenden's indie example, which this young helmer appears to have absorbed into his bloodstream.
Camera (color, B&W, Super 16mm-to-DV), Eric Robbins; music, Jeff Grace; production designer, David Bell; sound, Graham Reznick, Hebron Simckes-Joffee; digital effects, Quiet Man; special effects coordinator, Glenn McQuaid; special effects makeup, Daniel J. Mazikowski; stunt coordinator, David Leslie; associate producers, James Felix McKenney, Peter Phok; assistant director, Shahrzad "Sheri" Davani. Reviewed at Los Angeles Film Festival (Dark Wave), June 22, 2005. (Also in South by Southwest Film Festival.) Running time: 80 MIN.
 


This shoestring B movie provides the discerning horror fan with a viable alternative to yet another glossy '70s remake. A group of friends on their way to a wedding get stuck in the middle of nowhere and take shelter on a farm populated, as it happens, by killer vampire bats. And then there's that bothersome zombie problem. As even the title suggests, the situation bears a passing resemblance to that of The Birds , but recent film school grad Ti West evokes all manner of horror-tainted cinema: Sporting a factory-faded look reminiscent of Sam Raimi 's original Evil Dead , The Roost  is replete with slasher movie palpitations and Lynchian soundtrack hums. The director makes the most of the tense slow stretches, with the camera occasionally drifting off in search of action while characters wait in dreadful silence. Less successful are the self-conscious bookend segments framing the main story as a late-night TV attraction. It's a gratuitous attempt to put the rest of the movie in quotes (something accomplished far more subtly and effectively by the film's shrieking score), but The Roost  proves that West has enough talent to do without the gimmick next time around.
