 "Russian Dolls" belongs to a long line of airy French films that induce a pleasant buzz of Euro-envy. As its attractive characters, on the verge of 30, whiz between Paris and London on the Eurostar express and jaunt off to St. Petersburg for a wedding, you wish their American screen counterparts were as comfortable in their skins and as relaxed about sex. These people know how to enjoy themselves;  their Hollywood peers find it difficult to stop competing long enough to take a deep breath and drink in the moment.  That said, "Russian Dolls," written and directed by Cédric Klapisch, has not much on its mind beyond updating the lives of characters some of us already know. These are mostly the same people (played by the same actors) who shared a Barcelona apartment in Mr. Klapsich's 2002 comedy, "L'Auberge Espagnole."  In the years since, Xavier (Romain Duris), the womanizing charmer who narrates the sequel, has put his literary ambitions on hold while he  grinds out a trashy soap opera about love in Venice for television executives who encourage him to embrace clichés. (From the little we see of this show, it's simply wretched.) He also begins ghostwriting the autobiography of Célia (Lucy Gordon), a spoiled  British supermodel who whines the usual complaints about fame, and seduces him.  Mr. Klapisch's style might be described as Truffaut Lite. He treats digital video with some of the same devil-may-care playfulness that  Truffaut brought to film. Sequences are sped up, one scene is broken into digital patches, the timeline is scrambled, and fantasies embellish reality. Mr. Duris's Xavier suggests a 21st-century Antoine Doinel, Truffaut's fictional alter ego, portrayed by Jean-Pierre Léaud in the series that began with "The 400 Blows" and ended with "Love on the Run."  As Xavier flits from city to city and bed to bed, he also suggests a contemporary descendant of George Roundy, Warren Beatty's Hollywood hairdresser in "Shampoo," but without George's pathos. "Russian Dolls" comes the closest to "Shampoo" when Xavier's ex-girlfriend Martine (Audrey Tautou), a dedicated environmentalist and single mother of a young boy, berates him for leading a selfish, meaningless life, but her words carry no weight.  When Xavier hooks up with Kassia (Aïssa Maiga), a beautiful Parisian sales clerk from Senegal, the movie toys momentarily with the theme of interracial love. When he asks his lesbian pal Isabelle (Cécile de France), now a financial journalist, to pretend to be his fiancée to please his 98-year-old grandfather, and she in turn persuades him to put on drag, the movie touches tentatively on the subject of sexual fluidity.  So what is "Russian Dolls" really about? Like its forerunner, it is a generational group portrait of young, smart, sexy, well-educated Europeans at work and at play, but now it is several years later, and choices have to be made. The shallowness of this idealized depiction of European cultural homogeneity is largely camouflaged by the comfortable fit of its director's sensibility with the actors' likable, lived-in performances.  An apt alternative title for "Russian Dolls" might be "Lovers Without Borders."  Because Xavier speaks English as well as French, he continues to work on the soap opera after it becomes a French-British co-production broadcast in English. When his casual friend William (Kevin Bishop), a London stagehand who is the brother of Wendy (Kate Reilly), his English collaborator on the soap opera, falls in love at first sight with a Russian ballerina, William spends a year studying Russian, then flies to St. Petersburg to pursue her.  Mr. Duris, the wiry, crooked-toothed actor whose sensational portrayal of a musically gifted tough guy in "The Beat That My Heart Skipped" last year suggested a fusion of Jean-Paul Belmondo and Alain Delon, here is almost a dead ringer for the early-1960's German star Horst Buchholz. As weasly, glib and opportunistic as he may be at times, Xavier still hasn't lost his soul. And Mr. Duris's performance leaves you anticipating a third serving of Gallic froth, flavored with a hint of sadness, several years hence.

The motley crew of students whose DV-lensed adventures in a shared Barcelona household made "L'auberge espagnole" one of the most cost-effective international hits of 2002 -- 3 million tickets in Gaul alone -- is back in "Russian Dolls." Set five years later, with characters on the cusp of 30, Cedric Klapisch's incident-packed sequel seems poised for brisk biz in multiple territories. Viewers who thought the protags were superficial and annoying first time around will find little to change their minds here, but original pic's fans will probably embrace the now-scattered group's marginally more mature dilemmas centered on work and romance.
Having ditched the career in international finance he trained for, Xavier (Romain Duris) is barely making ends meet as a writer-for-hire in Paris. Creative writing has taken a permanent back seat to puff pieces, ghost-writing and substandard scripts for made-for-TV movies. "I wrote a book called 'L'auberge espagnole' five years ago, but haven't been able to find a publisher," he notes in his extensive voiceover.
Film is framed by Xavier typing on his laptop aboard the Eurostar train between Paris and London, reminiscing about his pals from Barcelona and how they all came to be in St. Petersburg to attend the wedding of English stagehand William (Kevin Bishop) and Russian ballerina Natacha (Evguenya Obraztsova). William had thrown the Spanish apartment into upheaval when he came to visit his sister Wendy (Kelly Reilly).
The episodic narrative bounces back and forth in time, and is sometimes strained, sometimes amusing and frequently too convenient. Nominal theme is casual bachelor Xavier's search for love and self-actualization in a high-speed, fragmented world. But as the overlong pic wears on, it's hard to care whether the puzzle pieces of the protags' lives fall into place or not.
Xavier's ex-girlfriend, Martine (Audrey Tautou), has a young son by a never-seen father, still carries a semi-torch for Xavier and, like all the characters on display, is searching for true love. Simultaneously cranky and cute, Martine seems like more of a prototype than a real person.
Pic's best adjusted protag (and liveliest perf) is Cecile De France's Isabelle, a forthright lesbian whose expertise in the stock market has made her a sought-after television commentator. Isabelle gave Xavier tips on landing girls in first pic and their friendship is still so strong that he moves in with her when a sub-let falls through.
Xavier is writing an idiotic romance for French TV. ("Don't be afraid of cliches," urge his employers. "Everybody likes postcards and sunsets.") When it becomes a co-production with the BBC and needs to be rewritten in English, Xavier starts working with none other than London-based Wendy, who's having a hard time ending her romance with a violent stoner.
Further complicating matters is a dream assignment to ghost-write the autobiography of top fashion model Celia Shelburn (Lucy Gordon), whose Paris apartment has a gorgeous view of Notre Dame Cathedral. As he zips to and fro under the English Channel, Xavier has to decide whether to trade merely words or also bodily fluids with both women.
Locations in Paris, London and St. Petersburg have been chosen with an eye for local color, but DV lensing seems needlessly muddy and ragged much of the time; some sections look as if they were shot on a cell phone. Still, Klapisch wields digital effects for maximum humor, emphasizing the hypocrisy seemingly built into publishing, media, fashion and other hip realms.

The entertaining sequel to Cédric Klapisch 's 2002 hit L'Auberge Espagnole  catches up with the former student roommates five years later, all scattered from Barcelona  now and approaching the landmark age of 30. They're still holding some fun tickets, but annoyances like maturity and melancholy are also creeping into their lives. The focus here is on Romain Duris 's Xavier, now a struggling writer in Paris who's searching for a new romance. Among others, ex–Auberge  residents Audrey Tautou , Cécile De France , and Kevin Bishop  also return, each with new comic quandaries and new directions. Shot in glamorous locations in London, Paris, and St. Petersburg  (the site of a wedding that occasions the characters' reunion), Klapisch's busy, bittersweet farce fairly wallows in the youth-obsessed worlds of media, high fashion, and publishing. Those who loved the original Auberge  will likely be eager to book rooms once again.
