
When little Ralph Walker (Adam Butcher) informs the stodgy principal of his Catholic school that he'd like to accomplish an amazing feat, Father Fitzpatrick (Gordon Pinsent) tells the boy, ''You're a 14-year-old. Greatness is not an option."
He has grossly underestimated this Ontario ninth-grader, who spends the rest of ''Saint Ralph," Michael McGowan's good-natured triumph-of-the-human-spirit comedy, trying to prove Father Fitzpatrick wrong. The kid has his sights on winning the 1954 Boston Marathon, and the priest is just fulfilling his obligations as the movie's stubborn villain.
Ralph's late father was a war hero, his mother lies (inexplicably) in a coma, and Ralph gets it in his head that the best way to save himself from official orphanhood is to perform a miracle. Apparently, winning the marathon (for his mother) counts. He embarks on a rigorous training regimen that includes running up hills, running in the rain, and running in the snow.
Butcher is a frail-looking whip of a boy, and the sight of him hustling while sopping wet seems vaguely like a Dickensian physical challenge. But his preparation is a blessing for the movie, saving it from an unfortunate resemblance to ''Rushmore."
Ralph is an academically underachieving, sex-crazed smart aleck, who's a hair too precious and on the verge of expulsion, not unlike Max Fischer in Wes Anderson's 1998 movie. McGowan seems to have arranged his shots to match some in Anderson's movie (one on a set of bleachers comes to mind), and the score, by Andrew Lockington, evokes the jaunty music Mark Mothersbaugh wrote for ''Rushmore."
The Anderson itch must have been a put-on, since once Ralph commits himself to his mother and the marathon, all the film's self-styled quirks evaporate. Ralph receives coaching from his religion teacher (Campbell Scott), spiritual guidance from his crush (Shauna McDonald), and miscellaneous assistance from his mother's hospital nurse, played by Jennifer Tilly. Soon, the town of Hamilton has quietly rallied around him in his quest to make it to Boston.
In redirecting the movie's personality, McGowan shifts ''Saint Ralph" from self-conscious to corny. The version of Leonard Cohen's ''Hallelujah" belted out by Gord Downie, the frontman for the Canadian rock band the Tragically Hip, succeeds at being both. But as predictably uplifting movies go, ''Saint Ralph" isn't completely charmless. Take the advice Ralph gets from his best friend, Chester (Michael Kanev), who, after disaster strikes, urges Ralph to press on. ''You just burned your house down. The least you could do is win Boston." Amen.


         "Saint Ralph" is an amiable sentimental fantasy, joining running, religion and a boy with a whole lot of problems into an earnest production that entertains even as it milks some of its situations for all they're worth.
 
  In writer-director Michael McGowan's scenario, Ralph does not start out with sainthood on his mind. Not even particularly religious, he's a 14-year-old student at a Catholic school just trying to get along in small-town Canada in 1953.
 


         






    That takes some doing, because Ralph's father died in World War II and his mother is hospitalized with a vague but potentially fatal disease. Though no adults seem to know it, Ralph is living by himself and taking his lumps from the lunkheads he goes to school with.
 
  As played by newcomer Adam Butcher, Ralph does have a fine quirky spirit, a kind of early teen bravado that wears better than you might expect. Which is a good thing, because in the film's early going, what we mostly get is Ralph's overdone interest in sex.
 
  But then Ralph's mother slips into a coma, and he overhears someone say it would take a miracle for her to wake up. That bit of information lodges in the young man's brain, and when someone on the school track team makes the offhand comment that it would take a miracle for Ralph to win the Boston Marathon, an obsession is born: He will win the marathon and his mother will get well as a result.
 
  Naturally the school's stern headmaster, Father Fitzpatrick (Canadian veteran Gordon Pinsent), is less than entranced with this odd notion of religious belief. Fortunately for Ralph and for the movie, he has a powerful ally in Father George Hibbert, a teacher beautifully played by Campbell Scott.
 
  In one of those movie coincidences that Scott's excellent performance makes believable, Father Hibbert just happens to have been Canada's top marathoner before he gave it up to join the priesthood. Impressed by Ralph's miraculous capacity for hard work, he gives the young runner the benefit of his experience and slowly but surely points the lad toward a race he calls "the ultimate test of fortitude."
 
  Writer-director McGowan, himself a former winner of the Detroit Marathon, knows and cares about running, and that and young Butcher's personality make the film's considerable training footage involving.
 
  McGowan's direction alternates, uncertainly at times, between sharp moments like on-screen references to numerous saints and the excessive uplift of sentimental music. Though Butcher is appealing, "Saint Ralph" is anchored by Scott's persuasive work as a model of intelligent decency. Though he cautions his students that "against boredom, the gods themselves fight in vain," no one will be bored when he is on the screen.
 
 'Saint Ralph'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13, for some sexual content and partial nudity
 
 Times guidelines:
 A lot of obsessing about sex in the early going
 
 Released by Samuel Goldwyn Films. Director Michael McGowan. Producers Seaton McLean, Andrea Mann, Mike Souther, Teza Lawrence. Executive producers Peter Sussman, Marguerite Pigott. Screenplay Michael McGowan. Cinematographer Rene Ohashi. Editor Susan Maggi. Costumes Anne Dixon. Music Andrew Lockington. Production design Matthew Davies. Art director Kenneth Watkins. Running time: 1 hour, 38 minutes. In limited release.   

Sometimes Campbell Scott fans have it tough. Like any great actor, he seeks out different material. Like a renegade, he avoids the mainstream. But it's starting to feel like for every Roger Dodger , a movie he singlehandedly turned into a mini-classic, there's a misfire like Saint Ralph . Here he plays Father Hibbert, a buttoned-up man of the cloth who coaches Ralph (newcomer Butcher), a big-eared Catholic ninth grader convinced that if he wins the 1954 Boston Marathon, it'll be the heavenly miracle that'll jolt his mother from a coma. At first, Ralph and the movie have moxie — the kid even gets busted for pleasuring himself in the public pool. Then Ralph starts asking us to take this cornball mission seriously. By the end, the beanpole is logging 4:25 miles and impossibly chugging slo-mo through rainy Boston on race day, helping Father Hibbert get his faith back. It's as if Max Fischer from Rushmore  turned, mid-movie, into Billy Elliot.

 When God appears to Ralph Walker (Adam Butcher), the plucky 14-year-old hero of Michael McGowan's desperately sentimental movie, "Saint Ralph," he is wearing a Santa suit. That alone should tell you everything you need to know about the film, set in a Roman Catholic boys' school in Hamilton, Ontario, in the 1950's. This crude, inspirational tear-jerker is as sweet as a bowl of instant oatmeal smothered in molasses. It should please those who honestly believe that Santa Claus and God are synonymous; others may retch.  Except for its soundtrack, which features a mawkish, heavily orchestrated rendition of Leonard Cohen's "Hallelujah," which the movie uses without regard to what the song is really about (a relationship), "Saint Ralph" looks and sounds a lot like a product of really, really old Hollywood. Once upon a time, the role of Father Hibbert, a mildly rebellious teacher who disobeys orders and coaches Ralph to run in the 1954 Boston marathon, might have been played by Bing Crosby, and Ralph by Mickey Rooney. Here Campbell Scott handles the Crosby role with poise and aplomb. Mr. Butcher's Ralph, who in the movie's opening scene confesses to 22 impure thoughts, suggests the young Mr. Rooney with a dirty mind.  All the hackneyed stereotypes are in place. Ralph's beautiful, saintly mother, Emma (Shauna MacDonald), hospitalized with an unidentified illness, is a maternal angel; even when she falls into a coma, an air of holiness envelops her. Jennifer Tilly applies her grating vocal honk to the role of Emma's spunky, good-hearted nurse, Alice. Ralph is cheered on in his crusade by his first crush, Claire (Tamara Hope), who wants to be a nun and dispenses bogus spiritual wisdom: if he rubs his knees with sandpaper until they bleed, then kneels in a pan of alcohol, she says, his quest will be advanced.  But the movie's biggest cliché is the school's stern headmaster, Father Fitzpatrick (Gordon Pinsent). A rigid disciplinarian who spies on his students from his office window with binoculars, he emits ominous growls when told that Father Hibbert is teaching the boys Nietzsche.  Little Ralphie's dream of running in the Boston marathon is ignited when Father Hibbert remarks offhandedly that the boy's winning would be a miracle equivalent to Jesus' conjuring loaves and fishes. Ralph takes him literally and convinces himself that if he wins, his mother will wake from her coma.  The story culminates with the big race. And guess who shows up in Boston to run with Ralph on the sidelines and spur him on when his strength flags? That's right: Santa himself.  "Saint Ralph" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has sexual innuendo and a scene of masturbation.

Even though it sprints along a well-trod path through familiar territory, "Saint Ralph" remains surprisingly compelling as it follows the misadventures of a young long-distance runner in Hamilton, Ontario during the early 1950s. With careful handling by savvy distrib, writer-director Michael McGowan's bittersweet comedy-drama could be a respectably leggy B.O. performer before hitting its stride in homevid and cable arenas.
McGowan employs well-apportioned measures of droll humor and emotional urgency while spinning the story of Ralph Walker (Adam Butcher), a precocious ninth grader at a Catholic high school where precocity is routinely punished.
The 14-year-old wiseacre does himself no favors by calling attention to himself: School officials could easily discover he's living at home alone, unattended by his grandparents, while his critically ill mother (Shauna MacDonald) is hospitalized. (The grandparents, like Ralph's war-hero father, are deceased.) Rather than maintain a low profile, however, Ralph repeatedly bends or breaks rules -- and even smokes an occasional cigarette -- much to the displeasure of Father Fitzpatrick (Gordon Pinsent), the school's headmaster.
To discipline his problem pupil, Fitzpatrick orders Ralph to join the cross-country team coached by Father Hibbert (Campbell Scott), one of the school's more enlightened teachers. But when Ralph's mother slips into a coma, the youngster accepts his punishment as a blessing. Guided by an irrational logic born of mounting desperation and Catholic education, Ralph figures that if he becomes a world-class runner and wins the Boston Marathon, the victory would be nothing short of a miracle. And a miracle, of course, would immediately restore his mother back to health. Right?
Father Fitzpatrick views Ralph's game plan as sacrilegious. And even the more sympathetic Father Hibbert -- an ex-runner who once dreamed of Olympic glory -- does his best to discourage the wannabe marathoner. As Ralph begins to win local and regional competitions, however, his coach increasingly is amused and enthused. Eventually, inevitably, Father Hibbert agrees to train Ralph for the race of a lifetime.
Throughout "Saint Ralph," McGowan strikes a satisfying balance of whimsy and realism. He brings an aptly light touch to potentially sappy material, indulging in overstatement only while underscoring a climactic scene with an overbearing rendition of a Leonard Cohen song.
Despite a few jokes (and one hilarious "American Pie"-style sight gag) involving the nascent sexual urges of the adolescent protagonist, funny business for most part is as restrained as dramatic content.
Newcomer Butcher make a winning impression while hitting all the right notes as Ralph, a character whose mischief and resilience bring to mind the adolescent hero of Francois Truffaut's "The 400 Blows." As the dry-witted, Nietzsche-reading Father Hibbert, Scott offers a sly, subtle performance that makes an effective foil for his younger co-star.
Tamara Hope displays impressive poise and sharp comic timing as Emma, a classmate immune to Ralph's romantic overtures -- or so she claims -- because she wants to become a nun. While Gordon Pinsent struggles manfully to bring nuance and shading to a one-dimensional role, Jennifer Tilly breezes through with a pleasing turn as a blunt-spoken but kind-hearted nurse.
Period flavor is greatly enhanced by production designer Matthew Davies and costumer Anne Dixon.
Camera (color), Rene Ohashi; editor, Susan Maggi; music, Andrew Lockington; production designer, Matthew Davies; costume designer, Anne Dixon; sound (Dolby Digital), Valentin Pricop; assistant director, Fergus Barnes. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Canada First!), Sept. 13, 2004. Running time: 98 MIN.

 


Catholic schoolboy Ralph Walker  (Adam Butcher ) quixotically enters the 1954 Boston Marathon, magically thinking that a big Beantown victory constitutes a miracle—and only a "miracle," according to a doctor, will awaken his comatose mother. The odd mix of arbitrary plot and fastidious details (here is mid-century Hamilton, Ontario !) might lead a viewer to believe that Saint Ralph  is the biopic of some awe-inspiring Canuck runner heretofore unknown stateside—Terry Fox  pretty much filled up that informational pigeonhole. Discovering that it's all made up renders the experience even more pointless. The race itself is a suspenseful sequence of slo-mo uplift—suspenseful in the binary sports flick sense of either he wins or he loses, uplifting insofar as it's a music video scored to yet another version of Leonard Cohen 's "Hallelujah," that de rigueur dirge that gives every montage from Shrek   to the O.C  .'s first-season finale a numinous coating of epiphany. There are points of contact with two other recent Catholic-youth titles: Millions  (with its similar saint fixation) and House of D  (fatherless boy, ailing mom). The most blatant rip-off is of the Rushmore  soundtrack. But Ralph Walker is no Max Fischer , and his monomania gets dull fast. The unintentionally humorous high point comes when Ralph pores over an amazingly thin book entitled Canadian Martyrs , recalling the Airplane!  passenger who, craving some light reading, receives the leaflet Famous Jewish Sports Legends
