         As a full-service holiday movie, "The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause" gets you into the mood to shop early and often by making the North Pole look like a shopping mall with a never-ending school pageant. Maybe you're not ready to deal with this stuff yet. The movies don't care if you are or not.
 
  And here's something else you'd better get used to: "The Santa Clause" is going to be around for a long while as a holiday franchise. At the start in 1994, we only had to deal with dysfunctional dad Scott Calvin (Tim Allen) mutating into Jolly Old St. Nick. It took eight years for Disney to decide Santa Scott needed a wife. So he married a high school principal (Elizabeth Mitchell). Now, we've got Scott's in-laws (Alan Arkin, Ann-Margret) to worry about and a Baby Santa on the way. Silver bells, indeed!
 


         






    Maybe with more characters to play with, the next half-dozen or so installments won't need to rely so much on someone like Martin Short to jazz up the proceedings. As Jack Frost, the envious sprite who conspires to take over Santa's gig, Short gets to sneer, glower and slither all over the place. He's a hoot whether he's doing a Broadway shtick, toadying up to the elves or cuddling up to Ann-Margret. (Did he really call her "kitten"? That's going to jab loose some memories in the older parents' — or grandparents' — memory banks.)
 
  Allen, meanwhile, seems content to just carry the enterprise on his padded tummy — that is, until his Santa is tricked by Jack into wishing his way back to his svelte Scott self as the movie goes "A Christmas Carol" on us and shows a North Pole run by Frost as a chintzy tourist attraction. One could insert a slew of unintended ironies here. But, heck, it's the holidays, right?
 
  In case things aren't complicated enough, Santa brings along his ex-wife (Wendy Crewson), her therapist hubby (Judge Reinhold) and their young daughter (Liliana Mumy, the spitting image of her dad, Bill "Danger, Will Robinson!" Mumy). The movie leans a lot on Ms. Mumy's doe-eyed gazes. They're useful as an early-warning device that Something Very Special is about to happen.
 
 'The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause'

 
 MPAA rating:
 G
 
  A Walt Disney Pictures release. Director Michael Lembeck. Writers Ed Decter, John J. Strauss. Based on characters created by Leo Benvenuti, Steve Rudnick. Producers Brian Reilly, Bobby Newmyer, Jeffrey Silver. Director of photography Robbie Greenberg. Editor David Finfer. Running time: 1 hour, 38 minutes.
 
  In general release.   

 One of the good things about bad movies is that when someone sneers about the unworthiness of a perfectly mediocre film like, say, “Crash,” you can turn to a seriously unworthy film like, say, “The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause” and laugh. Ho. Ho. Ho. The third though probably not the last in the successful “Clause” franchise (the first two films raked in almost $300 million  in American theaters), this latest installment again stars Tim Allen as the Everyman turned Father Christmas. Since there’s little drama to be wrung from a character as clean as Claus, the story cooked up by Ed Decter and John J. Strauss turns on the kind of message that could fit on the inside of a store-bought greeting card, essentially: Families are special, and you are, too.  Christmas is about to pop and so, with her first baby, is Mrs. Claus (Elizabeth Mitchell). She’s sad. She misses her parents. Her parents visit her. They tend not to say or do much, but because they are played by the invaluable Alan Arkin and the equally welcome Ann-Margret, you don’t really mind. The in-laws  haven’t a clue that their daughter is married to Santa, so he pretends that the North Pole is Canada, which is mildly amusing  only because Mr. Arkin views the masquerading elves with vinegary skepticism. Even better is Martin Short, who snaps the otherwise dead proceedings (the director is Michael Lembeck) to life as the villainous Jack Frost. Mr. Short is the kind of Christmas ham everyone can enjoy.  The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause is rated G for general audiences. It’s squeaky clean, but you might die of boredom.

Not unlike the shiny snow globe at its center, "The Santa Clause 3: The Escape Clause" is a thing of consummate craftsmanship, a smoothly engineered and fundamentally lifeless object that's nevertheless capable of giving even the grinchiest moviegoers a brief attack of the warm-and-fuzzies. With Tim Allen stepping back into the Santa suit and Martin Short slyly pocketing every scene as wily nemesis Jack Frost, this harmless addition to Disney's durable holiday franchise looks set to match its forerunners' $140 million domestic haul and rack up some serious Christmas bonuses as a yuletide perennial. Ho, ho, ho indeed.

As scripted by Ed Decter and John J. Strauss, two of the seven screenwriters credited on "The Santa Clause 2," pic reps a much cleaner, more streamlined ride than its overstuffed predecessor. Tots may recall in that 2002 film, Scott Calvin (Allen) -- having inherited the Santa reins after accidentally bumping off the big guy in the 1994 original -- wooed and wed uptight school principal Carol (Elizabeth Mitchell) and persuaded her to move up to the North Pole.
Now the Clauses are expecting a baby (parents can keep themselves awake by imagining the particulars), and Mrs. Claus is a hormonal wreck, feeling both homesick and resentful of her husband's workaholism as Christmas Eve approaches. "I hope you're not delivering when I'm delivering," she huffs.
To cheer up his wife and reassert the importance of family, Santa invites her parents, Bud (a reliably crusty Alan Arkin) and Sylvia (Ann-Margret), to spend Christmas with them at the North Pole. Unable to divulge his secret identity to the in-laws, Santa and his elves, led by head elf Curtis (14-year-old Spencer Breslin, whose voice has dropped an octave since "Santa Clause 2"), conspire to fool Bud and Sylvia into thinking they're in a less remote region of the frigid north, setting the stage for a predictable storm of Canada jokes (eh?).
Also along for the ride are franchise regulars Wendy Crewson and Judge Reinhold as Santa's ex-wife Laura and her husband Neil, and adorable moppet Liliana Mumy as their wide-eyed daughter, Lucy. Breslin's younger sister Abigail also pops up in a small role as an elf, though she regrettably shares no screen time with Arkin, her co-star from "Little Miss Sunshine." As Santa's teenage son Charlie, whose relationship with his father was the emotional focal point of the first two pics, Eric Lloyd has little more than a cameo this time around.
In a much more interesting development, meddlesome usurper Jack Frost (Short), jealous that he does not have a holiday of his own, like Santa does, offends the Council of Legendary Figures headed by Mother Nature (Aisha Tyler) and Father Time (Peter Boyle). Under the pretext of doing community service by working alongside Santa's elves, Jack quietly wreaks havoc on Santa's toy-making operation and, eventually, his ever-delicate family life.
A portly package of giddy, childlike enthusiasm and middle-age anxiety, Allen remains as warm, lovable and refreshingly human a St. Nick as ever. Yet it's Short whose energetic show of villainy shakes the film to life, adding a much-needed shot of bourbon to this bland eggnog. Sporting a two-faced grin and mini-icicles attached to his eyebrows, Short revels in Jack Frost's mincing manner, purring insinuations and multiple smirky asides, even uncorking his musical-theater pizzazz for a Broadway-style number.
Jack sets out to exploit the eponymous "escape clause" in Santa's contract, using the big guy's personal snow globe to trick him into renouncing his identity. What follows is a surprisingly brief "It's a Wonderful Life"-esque speculation, illogical even by the standards of cinematic time travel, that imagines what would have happened had Jack -- instead of Scott Calvin -- become Santa.
Apparently, the North Pole would have been converted into a gaudy theme park -- allowing the pic to explicitly critique the greed and crass consumerism that have become part and parcel of the holiday season. That's pretty rich coming from a film whose production design (by Richard J. Holland) itself resembles a mall display run amok, and whose overall aesthetic suggests no expense was spared in the wardrobe, makeup and visual effects departments.
Michael Lembeck directs the action with a surer touch and more consistent tone than he brought to "Santa Clause 2," and effortlessly pulls off the pic's sentimental, life-affirming moments without tugging too hard.
