There's an image of the rich as hateful and depraved aristocratic monsters that never goes out of style. It's an image that taps our envy (Look! They can do whatever they want! ) and also our wish for superiority (Look at how miserable they are! ). Savage Grace , based on a celebrated 1985 book of nonfiction, establishes its tone of bitter, murky anomie when Brooks Baekeland (Stephen Dillane), heir to a plastics fortune, takes his wife, Barbara (Julianne Moore  ), out for a night at the Stork Club. As the couple rip and gnaw at each other, we might almost be in the middle of some merciless Tennessee Williams climax. Yet the ugliness has only just begun.
What follows, as the film moves forward from 1946 to 1972, is colder still: adultery, malevolent sex, and the gloom of divorce, as Barbara takes it upon herself to raise the Baekelands' only child, Antony (Eddie Redmayne), a tall, wilting weed of a young man whose homosexual leanings she doesn't much care for. Savage Grace  has been shot with decadent cool creaminess, yet it's a rather slipshod movie. The director, Tom Kalin, stages acid duels, but he should have provided more psychological structure. Though Moore, a great actress, turns fury into verbal music, we're never quite sure what's driving her. When the film becomes an absent-father nightmare, with Barbara and her son filling that void in a secret and disturbing way, it has shock value, all right, but not necessarily emotional credibility.

 “Savage Grace,”  Tom Kalin’s long-awaited second feature (after “Swoon”), swoons through a number of lovely, storied places on its way to a sad and sordid end. Narrated by Tony Baekeland (played in young adulthood by Eddie Redmayne), it begins in the post-World War II Manhattan of late-night dinners at the Stork Club and moves on to Paris in the ’50s and then to Spain (Cadaqués and Majorca, to be precise) in the late 1960s and London after that.  Written by Howard A. Rodman, “Savage Grace” follows the true, appalling story of Tony and his parents, played by Stephen Dillane and Julianne Moore. Brooks Baekeland, heir to a plastics fortune (his grandfather invented Bakelite), is frustrated by his own lack of ambition and less than kind to his wife, Barbara. For her part, Barbara is impulsive and also somewhat pretentious, striving to jam herself into social niches where she won’t comfortably fit. Greeting a literary scholar who has come for lunch, she asks: “Was Proust truly a homosexual? Qu’est-ce que tu penses?”  That line, like so many others in Mr. Rodman’s script, is written and delivered with an arch, brittle self-consciousness that becomes oppressive over time. While it’s likely that the diction and phrasing of the dialogue approximates the idioms of rich expatriates during the decades in question, the characters still seem vague, stilted and unreal.  This is especially true of Barbara, whose volatile personality is at the heart of the story. She is, we infer, both victim and provocateur in her marriage, suffering from Brooks’s coldness even as she goes out of her way to inflame his contempt. Her relations with Tony range from neglectful to needy to downright monstrous.  But instead of a character, Ms. Moore presents a series of poses, phrases and disjointed emotions. The intriguingly epicene Mr. Redmayne is something of a cipher in the film, which is fine when Tony functions as the spectator and interpreter of parental melodrama. But by the time his own pathology comes to the foreground, his actions are less tragic than weird and mystifying.  Mr. Kalin, perhaps oppressed by a need to obey the chronology of the story, fails to infuse it with enough dramatic momentum or psychological gravity. Everything and everyone in “Savage Grace” looks utterly gorgeous — Ms. Moore even as she is coming undone, the tastefully appointed rooms she inhabits, the period-perfect clothes she wears — but the décor, rather than being the vehicle of high feeling in the camp-melodrama tradition to which the film aspires, suffocates and blurs every interesting emotion.  There is  a degree of pleasure to be found in watching a slow-moving spectacle of privileged decadence. But your interest in the decline of the Baekelands as they wander down the path from sarcasm and social posturing to abandonment, incest and murder never rises above the level of prurience. Even as it tries to be suave and nonjudgmental, “Savage Grace” has some of the breathless salaciousness of Barbara’s question about Proust. It lays out the facts of the case with the false nonchalance of a seasoned gossip, professing not to be shocked by anything even as it expects you to be.  Bisexuality! Marijuana! Anal sex! A father who sleeps with his son’s girlfriend! A son who sleeps with his mother’s boyfriend! All of great intrinsic interest, to be sure, but “Savage Grace” doesn’t seem quite sure of how to communicate its own fascination with such doings, whether to convey shock, envy, pity or bemusement. Proust might have known what to do with the Baekelands, but Mr. Kalin and Mr. Rodman don’t make much more of them than the mess they apparently already were.

That eternally fascinating duo Decadence and Dysfunction rear their pretty heads in "Savage Grace," a crushingly unsuccessful glimpse into the lives of the rich, peripatetic heirs of the Bakelite plastics fortune. Scripter Howard A. Rodman's treatment of an enthralling book is more a series of vignettes rather than a fully connected work, and helmer Tom Kalin seems unable to decide how much Sirkian melodrama to introduce into the heady mix. Gone are the reasons to be fascinated with these people, merely replaced with maddeningly over-arch dialogue and struggles with characterization. Biz may be modest but unsustainable.
"I was the steam when hot meets cold" comments narrator Antony ("Tony") Baekeland (Eddie Redmayne), an especially apt metaphor considering how Tony's personality dissolves like condensation before it has a chance to solidify. The only child of Brooks Baekeland (Stephen Dillane), himself the grandson of the inventor of plastic, Tony is saddled with parents whose insecurities stem from very different sources.
Mother Barbara (Julianne Moore) is the ultimate poseur, desperate to shake off the taint of her middle-class origins. Craving acceptance in society, she constantly overplays her hand, heightening husband Brooks' sense of their difference and his own discomfort with an unfulfilling life of ease. Her crushing need for love results in a smotheringly close bond with Tony, who she shows off to prove that the fruit of her loins can result in the perfect scion of American aristocracy.
Even early on Barbara and Tony (played as an insufferably artificial child by Barney Clark) have an almost unnatural rapport, facilitated by their frequent moves around the chic European watering holes of the rich. Though obvious from early on that he's gay, Tony has a brief dalliance in Spain with gold-digger Blanca (Elena Anaya), who's soon in Brooks' arms instead.
Separation between Brooks and Barbara is swift: Tony feels abandoned by his father as his mother continues to smother him with her neediness. When gay walker Simon (Hugh Dancy) comes to stay, mother, son and Simon all wind up in bed together, furthering the aberrant parental relationship as it continues to be taken down unnatural paths.
In the book "Savage Grace" (like its predecessor "Edie," published three years earlier), the narrative wasn't told so much as constructed, edited into being through first-person narratives that revealed the complexities of its characters. Kalin, so sure in "Swoon," overreaches in trying to tell too much of the story, shuttling between New York, Paris, Spain and London, but in trying to build his characters he rarely gets beyond the superficial. Tony's schizophrenia (a word never mentioned) is barely signaled, and throughout the pic it feels as if much more was shot and cut away, to deleterious effect.
Barbara is a poseur, certainly, but her lines are ridiculously convoluted in the first quarter. The peppering with French and Spanish is fine, but the sentences themselves are much too flowery, as if scripter Rodman confused written lines with spoken dialogue. Fortunately she does drop the plummy tones later on, but, as written, her attempts to be considered part of the inner circle come out as caricature.
Throughout the 26-year period covered Moore never ages. Is that because she never ages in Tony's eyes? She's undeniably a superb actress but hampered by pic's piecemeal nature. The most difficult scene, when Barbara places her hand on Tony's crotch and starts feeling him, is also her best, approached with a disturbing hardness coupled with need.
Stephen Dillane comes off well, perhaps because he's allowed to be more true to one character. It's not that Brooks comes completely alive here, but Dillane captures his insecurities (why is anal intercourse so often used as a shorthand for insecurities?), and is able to naturally deliver lines peculiar to Brooks' American upper crust milieu.
Redmayne has proven before that he's a fine actor, but here he's overcultivated the deadening tones of the American upper crust. He starts off like a Warhol denizen -- thin, blank and diffident -- then turns into an Abercrombie & Fitch model before settling into a Ralph Lauren look. Meanwhile Dancy tries to beat Moore at the archness stakes -- he's posing, not acting.
The range of European locales are attractively shot without making much of an impression. Period is well handled without being obsessively detailed. Music, like the intro to a jazz lite radio station, is a major problem, constantly distracting and false.


A lip-smacking episode of Lifestyles of the Rich and Depraved , designed more for train-wreck gawkery than psychological illumination, Tom Kalin 's garish melodrama applies icehouse style to hothouse material: the 1972 murder of socialite Barbara Daly Baekeland, former wife of the heir to the Bakelite fortune, by the grown son she'd taken to fucking to cure his homosexuality. From the life-preserver clinging of his culture-vulture mom (Julianne Moore ) to the contempt of his aloof playboy dad (Stephen Dillane ), young Antony Baekeland  was molded from birth into a sexually confused, neurotic mama's boy (played as an adult by Eddie Redmayne , who at his unhealthiest resembles Alan Colmes  after a Queer Eye  makeover). His standing as his mother's de facto husband led inevitably to incest, violence, and a grimly redundant self-suffocation; in Kalin and screenwriter Howard A. Rodman 's hands, his downfall becomes a glossy travelogue, with stops in Paris (where his mom has Antony favor the guests with a reading from the Marquis de Sade ), Majorca (where he and mom wake up on either side of her polymorphous walker, Hugh Dancy ), and London (where a fateful kitchen knife awaits). This marks Kalin's first feature in the 15 years since his queer-cinema landmark Swoon , a grave, provocative retelling of the Leopold and Loeb case that refused to explain the killers away as victims of mass gay panic. This, by contrast, is a tawdry nighttime soap that marvels without insight at its characters' despicable behavior: It squanders a major performance by Moore, who rips into Barbara's confrontational mania, maternal perversity, and all-consuming need with nail-clawing fury and no small amount of malicious humor—as when she tries to quiet her increasingly agitated son/handjob recipient with a sharp "Inside voice!"
