Mark (Chad Allen), the ardently messed-up protagonist of Save Me , has hit the bottom of a downward spiral of booze, cocaine, and compulsive sexual encounters with men in motel rooms. So when he agrees to go to Genesis House, a placid countryside Christian rehab center, the movie has already thrown us a curve. The mission of Genesis House is to fix the ''broken'' sexuality of gay young men. But Mark, who is every kind of addict, really does need fixing (of some sort). Even those of us who find anti-homosexual ''deprogramming'' to be hideously intolerant and naive may find ourselves oddly relieved that Mark is there.
Gayle, the Genesis House proprietor, is played with great tenderness and hidden, ambiguous resolve by Ugly Betty 's Judith Light, and there is something touching in the way that she tries to get this flock of young men to lay aside their deepest urges. She and her husband (Stephen Lang), the center's chief counselor, are good people with troubles of their own. (Gayle's gay son died, and she's still trying to save him.) They're more dramatic than the patients, who have a bland TV-movie functionality. When Mark meets the good-looking Scott (Robert Gant), we know exactly where the movie is headed. Yet it gets there in an intriguing way. Gayle would like to fill her charges with the Holy Spirit, but it never occurs to her that the more she succeeds, the more they'll come to experience the passions inside them as an outgrowth of God's love.

 Correction Appended  “Save Me” establishes a clumsy dialectical agenda straight (so to speak) out of the gate, crosscutting between a day in the life of Mark (Chad Allen), a cocaine-addled young man with a taste for messy sex in cheap motels, and a group of hymn-singing churchgoers with affiliations to the Genesis House, a retreat devoted to converting gay men to heterosexuality. Mark, hitting rock bottom, is shuffled off to Genesis by his brother, and with a quickness made possible less by the power of Jesus than by schematic screenwriting, casts aside his old habits and cheerfully embraces shiny, happy asexuality.  And yet, as the unreconstructed gay might say, look out, girl! Here comes Scott (Robert Gant), a hunky fellow resident, and the next thing you know Mark and Scott are kicking it with Satan over cigarettes and furtive man-on-man action.  Directed by Robert Cary from a screenplay by Robert Desiderio that never quite shakes off its aura of second-rate made-for-TV movie, “Save Me” has a lot of heart but little nerve and no surprise.  Judith Light is very good as Gayle, the stern yet loving mistress of Genesis house. But like everyone in the picture, she’s saddled with a reductive motivation (a gay son lost to suicide) that undercuts the film’s genuine sympathy for the emotional hazards of gay life.

Most filmmaking to date addressing the Great Divide between gays and the U.S. religious right has very much reflected its point of origin --delivering full moral condemnation from one side onto the other. "Save Me," the first feature from new gay-focused production company Mythgarden, is a welcome exception in that it effectively dramatizes the issues without caricaturing or pillorizing either party. Despite widescreen lensing, quietly involving feature has a telepic feel that might hobble theatrical prospects. But further fest travel should presage successful DVD and cable sales, while raising anticipation for Mythgarden's future offerings.
We first meet Mark (Chad Allen) during a drug and casual sex binge that ends in a suicide attempt -- not his first, apparently.
His conservative family won't take him in anymore, and he has nowhere else to go, so he ends up placed (though he claims he's OK with his orientation) at Genesis House, a Christian 12-step "recovery" facility "specializing in sexual brokenness." It's run by married couple Gayle (Judith Light) and Ted (Stephen Lang), the latter her second husband. A son Gayle had by her first husband, then tragically lost, proves key to why she takes a special motherly interest in the initially resentful, stubborn resident.
Mark does stick with the program, embracing Christ and even coming to think he can and should renounce his "lifestyle choice." A stumbling block, however, comes in the form of fellow resident Scott (Robert Gant), with whom he fast develops a close friendship -- while both struggle to ignore their equally strong romantic attraction.
There are no great surprises in seeing how Mark's eventually conflicting relationships with Gayle and Scott play out, or in the subplots involving other troubled Genesis residents. (The major one centers on Robert Baker as protag's virginal roommate Lester, a low-self-esteem case who comes to see the budding love between Mark and Scott as suggesting hope rather than sinfulness.)
But three scenarists, helmer Robert Cary and the solid cast all lift "Save Me" past potential cliche -- or preachiness -- by resisting easy melodrama in favor of styistic restraint and nonjudgmental empathy. Gayle may have a blind spot as big as the all-outdoors -- using a simplistic faith-based program to keep her own buried parental guilt at bay -- but pic refuses to teach her a politically correct "lesson" she wouldn't realistically be able to hear anyway. Nor is Mark an especially sympathetic protagonist, as he eagerly swaps secular addictions for supposedly sacred ones.
Indeed, pic loses credibility only in departments where it might be a little too evenhandedly nice: Genesis House is a pretty mild, non-brimstone-and-hellfire version of such facilities, and its residents are a more youthful and attractive lot than you'd typically find thereabouts. (Even supposed fatso Lester would only need a few months' exercise dedication to morph into a hunk.)
Speaking of realism, TV vet Gant ("Queer as Folk," "Popular," "Caroline in the City") may offer Mark a rather too conveniently dreamboat-y "out" from Genesis, but his canny underplaying puts the conceit across. Telepic queen Light refuses to jerk tears in a vinegary perf, deftly supported by the reliable Lang.
Pic was shot in anamorphic 35mm, though shown at Sundance in an HD cam transfer due to time constraints on getting a finished film negative in time for fest. Production values are thoughtful, though in both dramatic approach and packaging there's a conventional neutrality that doesn't distance pic quite enough from TV terrain. New Mexico locations add some flavor.
Camera (color, widescreen), Rodney Taylor; editor, Phillip Bartell; music, Jeff Cardoni; music supervisor, Debra Baum; production designer, Ray Kluga; set decorator, Alanna Levy; costume designer, Lahly Poore; sound editor (Dolby Digital), Patrick Giraud; assistant directors, James Currier, Thomas Buckley; casting, Billy Hopkins, Suzanne Crowley, Kerry Barden, Jennifer Richiazzi, Angelique Midthunder. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (Spectrum), Jan. 23, 2007. Running time: 96 MIN.
 



Save Me 's plot sounds like a ripped-from-the-headlines gay play circa five years ago, but the film itself subverts expectation. Mark (Chad Allen ) is a young New Mexico man who's crashing from a crystal-meth-fueled sex binge when his brother sends him to a remote desert ministry house run by Gayle (Judith Light ) and Ted (Stephen Lang ), two devout Christians whose mutual calling is to turn queer boys straight via the Word. A couple of Bible-study classes later, Mark has forsaken meth (with improbable ease), found the Lord, and begun a budding relationship with the star resident, Scott (Robert Gant ). Seeing Mark and Scott interact causes the already taut-necked Gayle to grow even tenser, and when she blows, it's high melodrama, but also a rather wrenching sight. Directed here by Robert Cary  (Ira and Abby ), Light, best known for her TV-sitcom work, turns a cliché—the zealot with a secret pain of her own—into an achingly sad woman; it's one of the year's best performances (from a script by Light's husband, Robert Desiderio ). Allen, Gant, and the ever-generous Lang match her nicely, and though Save Me  never quite surmounts its schematic scenario, scene by scene, beat by beat, it's pretty damn good.
