In America, when you watch an ethnic soap opera in which old-world parents reject their adult children's dreams of love, it's no secret that a lot of us can feel a twinge of nostalgia for those deeply rooted parental puritans, even though we're aware their view of relationships is all wrong. Saving Face , a pleasant if sketchy Chinese-American family drama, is a study in multigenerational guilt-tripping. Wilhelmina (Michelle Krusiec), a rising young surgeon, prefers women to men, but her mother (Joan Chen) would disown her if she knew. Mom, however, is every bit as scandalous: At 48, she gets pregnant without a husband, and her parents, who are stern survivors of the Cultural Revolution, are aghast. The writer-director, Alice Wu, fudges a lot of the basics — I never believed the heroine was really a physician — but the final, proudly public girl-on-girl smooch still jerks a tear.

owadays, the problems of immigration, assimilation and the tug between the old country and the new provide a source of dramatic tension in movies and plays that is as inexhaustible as the human desire to find a more fulfilling life. That tension only increases with the addition of a sexual twist, often the prospect of an ethnically mixed marriage. But in Alice Wu's amiable  romantic comedy, "Saving Face," which examines the lives of three generations of Chinese-Americans living in New York, it is a love affair between two young, attractive Chinese-American women. By now, even that scenario, in which same-sex lovers face parental intolerance, has become commonplace. But Ms. Wu's movie handles this material far more adroitly than most first-time feature films. She loves and understands her characters, especially the thorny and tradition-bound old folks, and her fondness for them bathes "Saving Face" in a palpable glow of affection. Whether the old country is China or  India, and the new one European or North American, the elder members of any immigrant clan tend to clutch  native traditions tightly and cling to quaint, provincial notions of family honor and pride. When their children and grandchildren assume the looser manners and styles of their adopted country, the senior family members either despair or swallow hard and learn to accept the new reality. Wil - Wilhelmina Pang (Michelle Krusiec), the film's central character - is a workaholic 28-year-old surgeon with an extremely promising career in Manhattan and no time to waste. A dutiful daughter, she visits her family once a week in Flushing, Queens, where her beautiful, widowed mother (Joan Chen) arranges for her to meet eligible Chinese bachelors at informal socials. Family peace is abruptly shattered when Wil's mother (identified only as Ma) discovers that she is pregnant at 48 and refuses to name the father. Disgraced, she is exiled to Manhattan to stay at Wil's apartment, where she whiles away the days moping and watching soap operas. The timing couldn't be more inconvenient for Wil, who has just begun a cautious affair with Vivian Shing (Lynn Chen), a flirtatious, sexually forthright ballet dancer who has interrupted her ballet career to venture into modern dance. Until now, Wil has used the demands of work as an excuse to explain her lack of interest in dating men. Living under the nose of a mother so homophobic that she won't even broach the subject of gayness, Wil has to sneak in what little time she has to spend with her lover. Vivian has little patience with Wil's reticence and continually pressures her to come out of the closet. At the same time, Wil is enlisted in her family's campaign to find a husband for Ma. In the movie's most amusing sequence, we meet the sorry lot of prospective candidates, each more eccentric and unattractive than the next, who besiege Ma with bouquets and blandishments. Besides Wil, Vivian and Ma, the movie's sharply drawn characters include Wil's ailing grandmother Wai Po (Guang Lan Koh) and stern grandfather Wai Gung (Jin Wang). Survivors of Mao's Cultural Revolution, both exhibit the toughness and solidity of people who have endured much harder times than their descendants. The movie is at its weakest when it succumbs to sentimental sitcom conventions.  Wil has an African-American neighbor and confidant, Jay (Ato Essandoh), who pops in and out of her apartment for comic relief without emerging as more than a friendly symbol of the ethnic diversity and potential romantic freedom New York offers. Sadly, as "Saving Face" ties up the strands of its story, it forfeits its credibility at a wedding finale with a series of instant feel-good solutions and reconciliations. Everything that happens in the last half-hour betrays the canny, hardheaded perspective of what came before. "Saving Face" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations and brief nudity.
Dachau  diary: Schlöndorff's vision of a lost nine days
One of Germany's last remaining cine-excavators of Nazi-era irony, Volker Schlöndorff  speculates on what happened during the nine-day gap in Luxembourgian priest Jean Bernard 's famous Dachau diary, when he was given leave to return home and attend his mother's funeral. Thoroughly fictionalized, this anomalous incident is read as a diplomatic scheme, in which the haggard clergyman (Ulrich Matthes ) is encouraged by a baby-faced Nazi (August Diehl ) to dissuade the home-parish bishop from passively resisting the Third Reich . Schlöndorff and his scriptwriters (German TV pros Eberhard Görner  and Andreas Pflüger ) uncork all manner of fascist prevarication, as Diehl's self-interested career man attempts to cross-pollinate genocidal social philosophy with hearts-and-minds politicking, and essentially, outrageously, sell the idea of Dachau's necessity to the Dachau initiate. The church's collaborationism is a looming, sordid secondary target, naturally, and in fact, Schlöndorff's movie plays best as a dry exercise in historical doublespeak and rationalization. (Unfortunately, the scenes of arrest and incarceration are all smudged up with digital slo-mo "emphasis.") As the traumatized hero, Matthes (Goebbels in Downfall ) is nearly mute, a stunned and impenetrable cipher caught in the cogs of nationalist will.
