 Actually, it's not Shiloh the adorable beagle who needs saving during most of this third film based on Phyllis Reynolds Naylor's novels about him. It's his abusive former owner, Judd Travers (Scott Wilson). The little boy who now owns Shiloh, Marty Preston (Jason Dolley), poses the question in voice-over: "All I could think about was how mean Judd used to be. Could somebody like that really change?"  Like the earlier Shiloh films, this one is set in a lovely rural world where houses have screen doors and front porches, but there's nothing simplistic about life there. Marty learns from his parents, his friends, a veterinarian, a teacher and even a kindly bartender about fairness, prejudice, motivations for human cruelty and the likelihood of moral salvation.  This is also a realistic world, one in which every scare doesn't turn into a tragedy, children are bored by visiting their grandmother at the nursing home, and emotion can be embarrassing. (Judd reacts to Marty's offer of friendship by smiling shyly and saying, "Well, then.")  "Saving Shiloh" is touching, intelligent and admirably thoughtful, but more action-packed than its predecessors, thanks to escaped convicts, a local murder and a truly suspenseful finale, with lives at stake. (But it's such wholesome suspense!) Most important, the dog that plays Shiloh gets plenty of cute close-ups and reaction shots.  "Saving Shiloh" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes some mild violence, references to a corpse and a fairly frightening near-drowning.

You can't teach an old dog new tricks -- and why bother, when he's a movie star? "Saving Shiloh," the third in the dog-hero trilogy drawn from the Phyllis Reynolds Naylor books, may be naive and narratively simple, but it's prime fare for the always underserved family aud. Look for minivans to be crowding mall parking lots.
The old adage about working with children and animals doesn't seem to have affected veteran Scott Wilson, who returns to the series as Judd Travers, curmudgeonly former pet-abuser and all-around suspect when anything goes wrong in the Midwestern town that's home to the Preston family and Shiloh the beagle. There's been a murder, and Judd's name is mentioned; there's a rash of break-ins and Judd's name is mentioned.
Only Marty Preston (Jason Dolley), who rescued Shiloh from Judd during the dark days of "Shiloh," believes in redemption, and that Judd has been its beneficiary. Wilson gives a performance that may be a bit too nuanced for this film, but it's gratifying to watch.
Maintaining domestic virtues and displaying strength of character are the lessons of "Saving Shiloh": Marty's dad, Ray (Gerald McRaney), is kind but firm; Mom (Ann Dowd), is a no-nonsense homemaker who always has the right word to correct Marty and his sisters. Dowd and McRaney seem more like grandparent material than the mom and dad of such young children, but everything else in the film is spelled out, as if with overcooked alphabet soup; this film is accessible to the youngest of children.
The camera work by Lex du Pont is a bit unsteady, and not purposefully so; the film has the flatness of an old postcard, and even the funkiest old dirt road seems to have been raked in anticipation of filming. But "Saving Shiloh" -- in which Shiloh himself is more of a supporting canine than top dog -- knows its audiences and will be fetching them to theaters.
Camera (color), Lex du Pont; editor, Clarinda Wong; music, Adam Gorgoni; production designer, Cat Cacciatore; set decorator, Jim Tudor; costume designer, Joslyn Lawrence; supervising sound editor (Dolby Digital), Craig Clark; associate producer, Craig Bowie; assistant director, Ron Dempsey; casting, Laura Schiff. Reviewed on DVD, Los Angeles, May 9, 2006. MPAA rating: PG. Running time: 90 MIN.
 

