         Peter Paige's "Say Uncle" opens on a cheerful note with a gay Portland man (Paige) playing happily with his beloved 2-year-old godson but quickly grows darker even as it remains essentially comic, no matter how disturbing and provocative the film becomes. The ending is a little too neat and smacks of wishful thinking, but Paige has created an engaging and insightful entertainment with considerably more substance than most small-budget, independent gay films.
 
  The joyful relationship between Paul and his godson comes to an abrupt halt when the child's parents break the news that they are moving to Japan, where the father has received a job offer he cannot afford to refuse. Paul, an aspiring, daydreaming artist supporting himself as a less-than-dedicated telemarketer, is devastated, and it emerges that Paul, because of a family tragedy in his childhood, suffers from arrested emotional development and identifies with children as a way of reconnecting with the happy times before catastrophe struck.
 


         






    Paul teeters on the brink of a nervous breakdown until his friend and coworker Russell (Anthony Clark), while strolling in the park, urges Paul not merely to observe the children at a playground but to join them in the fun.
 
  Paul quickly starts pulling himself together, and neighborhood mothers nod approvingly that a man is taking the trouble to play with children — until they realize that Paul has no child of his own among the playmates.
 
  When Paul freely admits this and that he is gay to one mother, Maggie (Kathy Najimy), he inadvertently sets off a four-alarm fire. To Maggie this automatically means he has got to be a child molester, and she's convinced that Paul fits the profile of such a predator. In no time Maggie is organizing an increasingly paranoid and hysterical campaign against Paul, of whom it is soon whispered that he is facing charges of child molestation in six states.
 
  Paige has said Paul andMaggie are both people whogo through life with blinderson and are thus bound to collide. So eager is Paul to play withchildren that he is unawarethat adults might get the wrong idea.
 
  Meanwhile, Maggie, consumed with fear over the potential danger that Paul represents to the neighborhood children, rushes to judgment without an iota of evidence.
 
  Conflict and hysteria escalate all too credibly and disturbingly in what becomes a comedy ofthe darkly absurd. Indeed, Na-jimy is at once hilarious and scary. To his credit Paige acknowledges that Maggie's parental concerns are legitimate but that she distorts them all out of proportion.
 
  Tall, thin and somewhat effeminate, Paul fits a familiar gay stereotype and, unfortunately for him, is a veritable Peter Pan. Adversity and injustice engulf the naïve Paul, yet they also propel him into growing up.
 
  Best known as Em-mett Honeycutt in Showtime's "Queer as Folk," Peter Paige reveals that he is not only a fearless actor but a skilled and thoughtful writer and director. "Say Uncle" is a notably risk-taking first feature.
 
 'Say Uncle'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R, for some language.   


The politics of homophobia and child molestation receive a badly misjudged tweaking in "Queer as Folk" star Peter Paige's writing-directing debut, "Say Uncle." With ideological and dramatic intentions neatly and somewhat satirically in place, pic contrives circumstances in which an impossibly naive young man's innocent love for kids is misconstrued by fearful, protective moms, making him the target of a grassroots witch hunt. Sure to be applauded by some and hissed at by others, the film's lack of a daring filmmaking package and bland cable-like look will make it a tough theatrical sell, but Showtime support will ensure future eyeballs. 
More than a mere godfather to toddler Morgan, artist Paul (Paige) is the little guy's best buddy, a whirling bundle of energy who leaves a first, and firm, impression that he's not just young at heart, but an arrested adolescent. Daydreaming at his work desk, he soon loses his dull-as-dirt phone-sales day-job, then learns Morgan's parents are moving to Japan.
Paul appears unable to process such information, and instead of, say, seriously burrowing into painting to express himself (he only dabbles, albeit angrily), he unwisely decides to try to make new young replacement friends at the local park. The kids may have a terrific new surrogate daddy in their midst, but their mothers, led by Maggie (Kathy Najimy), soon begin to eye him with suspicion.
Long before it gets to full-flung civic conflict, "Say Uncle" telegraphs that this will be a story of a misunderstood innocent with a good heart clashing with unfounded community fear.
Paige's script, for a while at least, tries to balance Paul's generous spirit with a sense that he's behaving stupidly. The weight of sympathy, though, eventually shifts in his favor when Maggie starts organizing an equally ill-conceived campaign to "out" Paul as a child molester, despite a lack of evidence.
Such a gambit transforms a genuine and reasonable fear of child molesters into something close to the butt of satire. For auds particularly sensitive to this issue, Paige's generally good-willed storytelling may come off as a slap in the face, and undermine his rather obvious message about society's fear of gay men. Working in the key of manic, and a world away from his far more adult role on "Queer as Folk," Paige, in a performance both likable and repellant,can never quite get to Paul's emotional core. It's a wonder how he could so misunderstand that his obsessive behavior with kids could easily be misread. Najimy, meanwhile, is forced uncomfortably to play the heavy. Good actors slotted in marginal and oddly plotted roles, Gabrielle Union and Lisa Edelstein bring their accustomed grace to tone down the satire.
Paige may have done well to bring in a camera-savvy director, since his own shooting is bland and seems intended for tube viewing. Portland is never expressly announced as the story's location, but burg's attractive side is nicely used. Kurt Swinghammer's music may not swing, but it sure is loopy.
