
The perpetual engine of the unkillable "Scary Movie" chain is toxic cynicism. At least two of the filmmakers of "Scary Movie 4," director David Zucker and co-writer Jim Abrahams, are parody heroes (they made "Airplane!"). But they seem fully aware that their movie should be projected onto a Glad body bag.
Part sketch-comedy cartoon, part Cracked magazine spoof, installment four is the most scornfully made yet. The high-definition video is particularly cruddy, and the plot plunges through the plots of other movies like a runaway elevator. Actually, that's a poor simile because it implies excitement and speed. What we get moves as fast as a corpse.
"Scary Movie 4" puts "Million Dollar Baby," "The Village," and "Brokeback Mountain" in a headlock, the "Saw" movies, too. But the guiding template here is Steven Spielberg's "War of the Worlds," with Craig Bierko in the Tom Cruise part. Under these circumstances, that film seems execrable. (That's what's scary about these movies; they make good films seem bad by association.) Spielberg's disaster flick is welded to the American remake of "The Grudge," whose pesky ghost boy is savagely played by little Garrett Masuda. This wing of the story also features the great Anna Faris, who's played the lobotomized Cindy Campbell in all four movies.
A lot of "Scary Movie 4" borders on abusive. The sight of a catatonic Cloris Leachman banging her head on a shelf or the image of Leslie Nielsen waking up next to a goose in his bed feels evil. (Although seeing the real Dr. Phil get thwacked with a falling light fixture does tickle.) Faris and Bierko are consistently funny, however. Try as you might, you won't find dollar signs flashing in their eyes. They're excellent sports, and low-rent geniuses playing the parts of fools. Regina Hall shows up, too, wearing a pair of fabulous gongs in her ears. She got paid. And she obviously spent her money on those.
Like Faris, Hall has also been in all four editions. But her appearance here is most distressing, since she's such a reminder of the one thing not thrown into the "Scary Movie 4" dumpster: point of view. The first two films, which were directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans and written, in part, by two of his brothers, were, amazingly, about how black people experience white people at the movies. Hall was frequently a riot as a token b-girl. This time around she's not funny so much as she is present and accounted for. But the woman is always interesting. She and Faris could be the Thelma and Louise of the movie-spoof business: Fearlessly driving off cliffs into God-knows-what, one disastrous sequel at a time.
.


         Isn't it amazing to see just how low some people will stoop if you pay them enough?
 
  This is no big revelation to those who watch Jerry Springer on a regular basis. If you don't, you may be surprised to spot Bill Pullman, Dr. Phil and Shaquille O'Neal among the many formerly respectable celebrities making like orangutans in service of the almighty paycheck.
 


         






    The occasion is "Scary Movie 4," the latest in the low-flying movie parody franchise spawned by the Wayans brothers, who wisely bailed out after the second sequel.
 
  Shaq and Dr. Phil show up for the pre-opening-titles blackout sketch, a spoof of "Saw" in which the hoops star can't make a basket and the king of self-help TV disses his whining fan base. This turns out to be one of the sophisticated notions of this fourth installment, which has romantic leads Anna Faris and Craig Bierko lost in some Twilight Zone-ish crossroads of Spielberg's "War of the Worlds," Shyamalan's "The Village" and the Japanese horror flick "Ju-on," remade Hollywood-style as "The Grudge."
 
  You needn't have seen any of these movies to get the jokes, which depend on your funny bone's sensitivity to blind women relieving themselves in public, men kissing and old people displaying their naked bodies. That last sight gag comes courtesy of Leslie Nielsen, who has gone above and beyond the call of duty for director David Zucker.
 
  In addition to the 487th unfunny send-up of "Brokeback Mountain," screenwriter Craig Mazin saves potshots for other targets that may have otherwise gone unnoticed, such as Tom Cruise, Michael Jackson, Oprah Winfrey and President Bush.
 
  The wellspring of movies and celebrity is such that the writer of any subsequent "Scary Movie" should not have trouble finding material. The only problem, it would seem, is how to market your product when pitching to an audience not accustomed to counting past three.
 
 'Scary Movie 4'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for crude and sexual humor throughout, some comic violence and language
 
 A Miramax/Dimension Films release. Director David Zucker. Screenplay Zucker, Craig Mazin, Jim Abrahams, based on characters created by Shawn Wayans & Marlon Wayans & Buddy Johnson & Phil Beauman and Jason Friedberg & Aaron Seltzer. Director of photography Thomas Ackerman. Editors Craig Herring, Tom Louis Lewis.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 23 minutes.
 
 In general release.   

If the Scary  franchise continues beyond Scary Movie 4  — and there's no reason to think it won't, so long as the universe keeps providing such spoof-ready pop-cultural phenomena as Saw , The Grudge , and Tom Cruise's lovestruck gymnastics on Oprah's couch — then here's a modest proposal: Enforce a one-term limit on whichever auteur de junque is entrusted with Scary 5 , 6 , 7 , or 13 . That way, not only would more artistes get to play in the game (I've got a hankering to see what Baz Luhrmann would do with the form, in full Moulin Rouge  twirl) but audiences would be spared the diminishing returns bred of overfamiliarity with a genre that's hit-or-miss to begin with. (One man's Chris  Elliott-as-Village-idiot snot joke is another woman's look-at-the-wristwatch moment.)
All this is my way of saying that just as the Wayans brothers' Scary Movie 2  was a duller model than their original Scary Movie , so David Zucker's Scary Movie 4  offers nothing we didn't see in his Scary Movie 3  — except, perhaps, the uncomfortable sight of Dr. Phil trying to mock the unbearable lightness of being Dr. Phil while Shaquille O'Neal peddles his Shaq-ness. The plot (what plot?) solves the mystery of a haunted house, a ghost boy, and an alien invasion, stumbling goofily from punchline to punchline; the Brokeback Mountain  joke with two black cowboys (Anthony Anderson and Kevin Hart) defending their heterosexuality while reaching for lubricants was tired four months ago. I bow to reliably funny franchise princesses Anna Faris, as resilient heroine Cindy Campbell, and Regina Hall, as Cindy's horny pal, Brenda. (Faris, a Brokeback  cast member for real, now gamely bathes Cloris Leachman with a bucket of fake urine in the name of hilarity.) But I wonder when the pair might want to relinquish their whoopee-cushioned thrones. (Craig Bierko plays War of the Worlds ' Tom Ryan playing Faris' next-door neighbor and boyfriend. And a fine crazyperson he makes bouncing on Oprah's furniture with Cruisey mania, too.)
As ever, the criteria for mockworthiness have less to do with the scariness of the source material (or, for that matter, the precision of the joke bombs) than a certain self-seriousness expressed in an easily identifiable production design that's ripe for loving cannibalization. Zucker and his crew (including scripters Craig Mazin and Jim Abrahams) have fun with the working-class housing in War of the Worlds  (and Dakota Fanning's gumdrop- colored wardrobe), the dour landscape in The Village , and the accursed little stool that signals tragedy in the ring in Million Dollar Baby . They just don't have much to say about the movies they mock.
And as ever, the jokes are a jumble of the gross, the baggy, the raunchy, the mistimed, and — every once in a while — the refreshingly incorrect. The scariest moment in Scary Movie 4  involves Zucker veteran Leslie Nielsen, playing his patented bumbling President Harris: While the U.S. is under attack, this yutz sits in a chair at an elementary school, raptly listening to a kid read a book about a pet animal.


The even numbers don't favor the "Scary Movie" franchise. Inspiration ran dry for the Wayans Brothers in No. 2; now successors David Zucker & Co suffer gag fatigue following up their moderately improving efforts on the third installment. "Scary Movie 4" finds horror parody overshadowed by ho-hum groin blows, C-list celebrity cameos, slapstick child abuse, soon-to-be-forgotten hip-hop personalities, plus scatalogical and gay jokes; real laughs are few. Nonetheless, hardtop and ancillary coinage should be robust, with the horror genre's continued high popularity clinching pic's pre-sold lowbrow appeal.
After briefly getting Dr. Phil and Shaquille O'Neal into "Saw I's" central predicament, then bringing back Charlie Sheen from "Scary 3" for a Viagra-impaired suicide, series star Anna Faris as dumb blonde Cindy Campbell gets a job as nursemaid to an infirm elderly woman (Cloris Leachman). Latter's house is haunted by a malevolent ghost child a la "The Grudge." But before she can dig too deeply into that mystery, Cindy gets distracted by the handsome neighbor next door, divorced and negligent working-class dad Tom Ryan (Craig Bierko). Then aliens attack, and Tom flees with the kids he's semi-estranged from a la "War of the Worlds."
Cindy, too, gets the hell outta town, picking up fellow series regular Regina Hall as randy Brenda Meeks (despite the fact she's been killed in each prior "Scary"). They end up in a time-warped village like "The Village," with Bill Pullman as William Hurt, Carmen Electra as Bryce Dallas Howard, and Chris Elliott as Adrien Brody.
Others who get more than a single scene include Leslie Nielsen as an idiot President and Michael Madsen as Tim Robbins' "War" nutcase. James Earl Jones narrates.
There's not a lot of satire left in these films. Most of the jokes are just references to other movies, or rote ow-my-head! slapstick violence, or a combination of both. Rarely is much fun had with genre conventions -- as if that might be too sophisticated for an audience that finds humor enough in simply being reminded of the movies watched and songs heard since "Scary Movie 3."
With so much depending on disposable pop-culture touchstones, the question is whether such features will have any entertainment value left when for example the word "Chingy" once again signifies ... nothing.
Minus the closing credit crawl, and an epilogue sending up Tom Cruise's Katie-lovin' wigout on "Oprah," "4" would scarcely nudge 75 minutes. Which is still about 70 minutes longer than it warrants. If Faris and Hall's comic chops are barely exercised here, time is still on their side; one hopes someday they'll get the stellar lead roles they deserve.
Still, it must be said that the production package is loud, pacey and colorful enough -- decent CGI FX included -- that a whole lotta not-much goes by with painless speed.

Part three was so wretched, it actually made you miss the Wayans brothers, but the fourth Scary Movie  has its share of good laughs. It unspools like a Mad  magazine parody, primarily of The Grudge  and War of the Worlds , but also some lesser targets both obvious (Saw ) and not (Fahrenheit 9/11 ). Anna Faris  returns, this time channeling Sarah Michelle Gellar , while Craig Bierko —underrated as a comic actor—goes to town on Hollywood 's biggest target, Tom Cruise . (Other good spoof-casting choices include Chris Elliott  for Adrien Brody  and Bill Pullman  for William Hurt  in The Village , and Charlie Sheen  for Pullman in The Grudge .) The jokes miss more than they hit, but there are a lot of them, and when they work, it's gold. (A gag that involves a car's automatic-locking system is utterly brilliant.) And given that director David Zucker  recently became a Republican, bonus points for all the jokes involving Leslie Nielsen  as a familiarly bumbling president.
