         When individuals learn of brutality on an almost unfathomable scale, what is the appropriate response? The title of director Carla Garapedian's documentary, "Screamers," refers to a resolute determination to bring genocide to light. The film follows Armenian American alt-metal band System of a Down and others as they educate people about the 1915-18 Armenian diaspora in Turkey, in which an estimated 1.2 million people died.
 
 Those events are widely recognized as "genocide," and the film focuses on efforts to persuade Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States to proffer official acknowledgment.
 


         






    "Screamers" springs off the multi-platinum, Grammy-winning band's most recent tour, during which it distributes political pamphlets and in at least one concert commemorating the 90th anniversary of the Armenian genocide, shows its fans news reports on the subject. The band puts the issue before thousands who wouldn't have otherwise thought of it, but Garapedian errs in assuming that the film's viewers are necessarily fans. There's plenty of concert footage — probably too much for non-devotees. But there's also testimony by authors, politicians and a former FBI interpreter. Lead singer Serj Tankian appears at a rally to convince House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert (R-Ill.) to schedule a vote on the issue; later, the soft-spoken rocker tries politely to engage Hastert in person.
 
 What will probably stay with any viewer are the film's tales of epic cruelty, told on a personal scale (one eyewitness is Tankian's grandfather). Garapedian shows disturbing visual evidence of genocides from 1915 to the current slaughters in Darfur. The piece is intelligently made, although the director often doesn't establish place or time, leaving the viewer unmoored.
 
 But what is the ultimate aim of people who call themselves "screamers"? Is one congressman right when he testily argues that "to bring this up year after year serves no purpose"?
 
 The film postulates that acknowledging genocides could have a preventive effect, but does not prove that failure to recognize the horrors of 1915-18 paved the way for actions such as Hitler's two decades later. After all, while only fringe groups still question whether the Jewish Holocaust occurred, there have been many genocides since.
 
  The ultimate benefit of shining a bright light on this darkness may be to achieve a sense of closure for descendants of the victims, but that may be justification enough.
 
 
MPAA rating: R for disturbing images of genocide and language. Running time: 1 hour, 31 minutes. Exclusively at Mann Chinese 6, 8106 Hollywood Blvd. (at Highland), (323) 777-FILM #002; Criterion 6, 1313 Third Street Promenade, Santa Monica, (310) 248-MANN #019; Exchange 10, 128 N. Maryland Ave., Glendale, (818) 549-0045 #391; AMC's The Block 30, The City Drive, north of 22 Freeway, (714) 789-4AMC.
   


What does metal band System of a Down have to do with the mass extermination of Armenians in 1915? Descended from survivors of the so-called "Armenian genocide," band members teamed with Armenian-American filmmaker Carla Garapedian and partner Peter McAlevey to make "Screamers," a soapbox doc that intercuts concert footage with talking heads and scenes of horrifying human atrocity. But a noble cause does not a good movie make. Pic repeatedly drowns its impassioned message with music, creating an awkward hybrid between history lesson and concert doc that will be a tough sell to either aud.
If the recent Dixie Chicks study "Shut Up & Sing" demonstrates how quickly the public can turn on artists for being politically outspoken, "Screamers" counters with a more optimistic view: System of a Down's fans actually expect a level of political activism from the band, who have made it their personal cause to spread awareness of the "ethnic cleansing" Hitler reportedly used as his model for the Holocaust. To this day, Turkey denies the "historical intrigue" of the deportations and massacres as a lie, prosecuting critics for denigrating "Turkishness," while U.S. and U.K. politicians resist officially recognizing the Armenian genocide.
With his Weird Al hair and King Tut goatee, lead singer Serj Tankian proves most eloquent on the subject. Docu shows Tankian reflecting on his heritage, both on the road and in conversation with his disabled grandfather, who shares stories of the long marches he endured as a child.
Pic's most surprising revelation concerns the extent to which System of a Down use their celebrity to draw attention to the issue (many of their songs address the subject directly), even going so far as to broadcast related news footage during their concerts and giving classroom lectures on the subject.
And yet, the movie scrambles the message. Every few minutes, just as the interview footage begins to gather momentum, another heavy-metal song rumbles to life, and Garapedian and editor Bill Yahraus whisk auds away again to an arena where goth kids are worshipping at the band's feet.
On one hand, System of a Down specifically wants the world to acknowledge the eradication of more than a million Armenians as "genocide," a semantic distinction that might pave the way to reparations. But pic doesn't define the term until 50 minutes in, and no sooner does it explain the "G word's" potential -- "If it's 'genocide,' then you have to do something about it" -- than 
it offers the counter-example: "The Bush administration 
seemed to think if they called it 'genocide,' then they were doing something."
"Screamers" begins to lose focus as montages take on the many calamities of the past century at once. Photos of forlorn Armenians and skin-and-bones corpses certainly turn the stomach, but pic's slideshow-of-horrors strategy blends them with images of the Holocaust and mass killings in Rwanda, Sarajevo, Srebenica and Darfur, making it tricky to distinguish one mass grave from another.
The effect, much like the band's music, is one of shock and rage. Instead of communicating the facts in an organized and effective way, the film embodies an emotional response to the atrocities. The band and crew seem to be venting their frustration, but auds seeking a provocative intellectual discourse would be better served by Atom Egoyan's "Ararat."
Most of the interviews with relevant politicians and activists take place primarily on park benches and noisy city streets, which gives the film a disorganized and almost impulsive feel, while fighter-jet clips and other anti-violence inserts have a way of upstaging the rocking concert footage.
