         Christian music star Michael W. Smith makes his feature film acting debut as an associate pastor at a mega-church who serves a reluctant apprenticeship at an urban church, in the prosaic drama "The Second Chance." A movie-of-the-week treatment of race and class, the film credibly portrays the day-to-day workings of an urban ministry.
 
  Smith plays Ethan Jenkins, who has turned away from a drug habit and successful music career to work for his father, Jeremiah (J. Don Ferguson), the head of a plush suburban congregation known as the Rock. The Rock still manages and finances Jeremiah's original ministry, Second Chance Community Church, now run by his protégé, brash former basketball player Jake Sanders (jeff obafemi carr). After a couple of pastoral miscues, Jeremiah sends Ethan to "watch and learn" at Second Chance, where the younger Jenkins clashes with Jake.
 


         






    Smith won't be adding Oscars to his Grammys anytime soon, but he acquits himself well enough opposite the more formidable carr. "Second Chance" was written by Chip Arnold, Ben Pearson (who also served as director of photography) and Steve Taylor, directed by Taylor.
 
 "The Second Chance,"
 PG-13 for some drug references. Running time: 1 hour, 42 minutes. At Edwards Spectrum Imax, 65 Fortune Drive, Irvine, (949) 450-4920; opens Feb. 24 at Magic Johnson Theatres, 4020 Marlton Ave., L.A. (323) 290-5900, Ext. 703.
   

 Wrestling the good book from the hands of Mammon and dragging wealthy believers back to first principles can be an uphill job. So in "The Second Chance," two young pastors from opposite ends of the economic spectrum join forces to combat urban rot the old-fashioned way: with hands-on assistance and plenty of singing.  Ethan (the Christian musician Michael W. Smith) is the charismatic associate pastor of an affluent white suburban church where donations substitute for service. Resplendent in a frosted hairdo and Gucci suit, Ethan spends more time worrying about his television appearances than about the souls of his congregation. Forcibly assigned to an inner-city black church run by Pastor Jake (Jeff Obafemi Carr), Ethan tries to convince his board that another candidate would be more suitable ("I hear he speaks Ebonics"), but moral realignment awaits. After a few days in the hood helping addicts and dodging gangs, Ethan is left wondering whether choosing expensive china patterns for his upcoming nuptials is the best way to do the Lord's work.  Startlingly direct if unavoidably preachy, "The Second Chance" takes aim at Christianity's racial divide and the corporatization of faith. Its message is simple: being a Christian requires more than just dropping a check in the collection plate every Sunday morning.  "The Second Chance" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some drug references and mild violence.