Can a single scene save a movie? An hour and 20 minutes into The Secret Life of Words , Sarah Polley delivers a halting, evocative 10-minute monologue that finally unlocks the mystery behind her guarded character, a deaf, indeterminately accented nurse caring for a burn victim (Tim Robbins) on a deep-sea oil rig. Polley is mesmerizing as she raises the movie's stakes, but it comes too late. The sequence is the only highlight of an opaque film that waits too long to tell us why we should care.

 In “The Secret Life of Words,” the radiant Canadian actress Sarah Polley shrinks into the role of Hanna, a crumpled, hearing-impaired young factory worker with an Eastern European accent who lives somewhere in Britain. Numbly discharging the rituals of daily life, Hanna rarely speaks and prefers to seal herself in silence by turning off her hearing aid.  Only once does she reach out, by telephoning a mysterious older woman (Julie Christie, compelling in a cameo role) who we later learn lives in Denmark and works for a human rights organization. Even then, Hanna doesn’t speak.  Her drab routine — each day at lunchtime she consumes the same bland meal of chicken, rice and half an apple —  is interrupted by a summons from her boss, who commends her for punctuality and perfect attendance in the four years she has worked at the factory. But her rigidity and remoteness and her refusal to take time off, he says, have prompted complaints from her co-workers; she must take a vacation.  Thus begins Hanna’s awakening. The movie, written and directed by the Spanish filmmaker Isabel Coixet, whose last feature, “My Life Without Me,” also starred Ms. Polley, prolongs the mystery of her identity until well after the halfway point. Then it explodes into a catharsis.  While on holiday in a coastal town in Northern Ireland, Hanna overhears a cellphone conversation about a flash fire at an offshore oil rig that killed one man and left another seriously burned and in need of care. Volunteering her services as a nurse, she is flown to the rig and meets the burn victim, Josef (Tim Robbins), who suffered corneal damage that has left him temporarily blind.  A tattooed roughneck with a kind heart, Josef is flirtatious, playful and life-loving. From the moment  Hanna appears, he bombards her with questions that she refuses to answer. When she won’t even give her name, he dubs her Cora. He describes her as having “a blonde voice” and the clean scent of almond soap.  Some of his questions are extremely forward: Does she prefer men who are uncircumcised? When she plays dumb, he begins confiding his own secrets, including the fact that the name Cora belongs to his best friend’s wife, and that he can’t swim. Almost imperceptibly, she begins to warm.  At long last, Hanna, in a small, quiet voice,  delivers a shattering soliloquy whose details remain seared in your mind long after the movie is over. As Josef absorbs the shock of her confession and begins to shudder with sobs, he gathers her in his arms, and the exquisitely coordinated performances elicit an empathy as powerful as anything I can remember feeling in a recent film.  “The Secret Life of Words” is much stronger than “My Life Without Me,” in which Ms. Polley played another bruised angel, a wife and mother stricken with cancer and given two months to live who conceals her diagnosis from her family and embarks on a final fling with a man she meets in a Laundromat.  As its title suggests, “The Secret Life of Words” contemplates the insufficiency of language to encapsulate  traumatic experience.  As eloquent as Hanna’s confession may be, the tearful embrace she shares with Josef conveys far deeper feelings.  The confession, which I leave you to discover for yourself, is the kernel around which this otherwise eccentric film somewhat carelessly wraps itself. Ms. Coixet may be wonderful with actors. But when it comes to the mechanics of storytelling, she is often ungainly and tin-eared. The movie begins on two wrong notes: an abrupt sequence of the fire in which Josef leaps into the flames, and an enigmatic child’s voice-over delivering what sounds almost like gibberish. The identity of that child, who returns for an epilogue that feels unnecessary and grating, isn’t revealed until late in the film.  The movie’s acoustic problems, which are most glaring in these voice-overs, persist through much of the film. In contrast, the score, which intersperses muted jazz with songs by Tom Waits, David Byrne, Antony and the Johnsons and others, is unusually evocative.  “The Secret Life of Words” fitfully diverts its gaze to the other inhabitants of the oil rig, which has been shut down since the fire. As these oddballs and loners, isolated in the middle of a gray churning sea, wait for their future to be disclosed, the movie sketches a parallel world of people in a limbo of isolation and uncertainty. As intriguing as these characters are (especially the chef whose fancy cooking repels the workers and the resident oceanographer obsessed with the mussels that proliferate around the rig), the relationships remain sketchy.  But when “The Secret Life of Words” returns to Hanna and Josef and their struggle to connect and to heal, it glows with humanity.

Sarah Polley gives a wonderfully searching performance, as a woman in a state of extreme isolation, in "The Secret Life of Words," a compellingly claustrophobic drama set mostly aboard an oil rig. Altogether more challenging than helmer Isabel Coixet's previous movie, "My Life Without Me," in which Polley also starred, pic tackles its big theme -- silence as a defense against tragedy -- with delicacy, sympathy and originality, sans the sentimentality that threatened "My Life." "Words" looks likely to make itself heard at fests and on the international arthouse circuit.
Hanna (Sarah Polley), who wears a hearing aid, is timid, insecure and living a solitary existence. She has worked for four years in a factory without a break -- a fact that makes her colleagues uneasy. Her boss (Reg Wilson) suggests she take a month off, and Hanna, though uneasy at the prospect, heads for a coastal town in Northern Ireland.
There, in a restaurant, she overhears Victor (Eddie Marsan) in a phone conversation about an accident on a nearby oil rig for which he is responsible. The survivor, Josef (Tim Robbins), needs treatment, and when Hanna tells Victor she's a nurse, she is -- rather implausibly -- flown immediately to the rig. She finds Josef lying in bed with multiple burns (graphic make-up work by Ana Lopez-Puigcerver) and damage to his corneas, meaning he's going to be blind for a couple of weeks.
The rig's other inhabitants are bouncy Spanish cook Simon (Javier Camara), who prepares haute cuisine that's not to the others' taste; gentle, older Dimitri (Sverre Anker Ousdal), who recognizes and responds to Hanna's air of solitude; and introverted, ecological Martin (Daniel Mays), who's studying the number of times waves strike the rig, but whose real interest is the freak tropical mussels he pulls up from its base. Other characters are of less interest, but Hanna has intuitively recognized that there may be a place for her among these loners.
Pic's real focus is the beautifully played, trembling exchanges between Hanna and the intelligent, self-deprecating Josef -- an all-round good guy who got his burns by trying to save someone else. The fact he never tells Hanna this reveals plenty about his nature and morals, and the script is carefully managed so that what the characters don't say -- particularly in Hanna's case -- is more significant than what they do. Hence the film's title.
In their relationship's early stages, Josef asks Hanna whether, for reasons that later become clear, he can call her "Cora." Josef does all the talking, the fact that he's blind allowing him to take verbal liberties, spin off into amusing, surreal flights of fancy, and tell her the secret stories of his life, which reveal surprising bonds between them. Hanna, on the other hand, is frustratingly tight-lipped. When she finally smiles at something Josef's said, it's a big moment.
The mysteries about Hanna's behavior accumulate. Where is she from, and why is she in Ireland? Why does she telephone Inge (Julie Christie), a woman in Denmark -- and then say nothing? Why does she not tell Josef her real name? The truth about her -- for the viewer as well as for Josef -- is not revealed until an intense, though not altogether unexpected, scene in which she opens the verbal floodgates, and both thesps outdo themselves.
Playing, as in "My Life," a woman at the end of her emotional tether, Polley manages to maintain the viewer's interest most of the time in a character about whom we know practically zero. She is superbly otherworldly, transmitting a fragility that, given pic's location, is an inevitable reminder of Emily Watson's character in Lars Von Trier's "Breaking the Waves." Immobile for most of pic, Robbins does well to bring Josef alive as a character. Of the other thesps, Camara stands out as the comic relief.
The discomforts of life aboard the vast, impersonal rig, and the absurdity of being stuck on a huge hunk of metal with people who don't really like each other, are nicely evoked in several scenes -- an impromptu karaoke evening, and Martin's lonely basketball games. However, Coixet does have a tendency to over-exploit whimsy, as in the unexplained presence of a goose on the rig.
Some impressively lensed linking-sequences break up the narrative, using fine songs from the likes of Clem Snide and David Byrne as background. (There's little in the way of a regular score.) As in "My Life," literary refs abound, particularly to Brit writer John Berger.
Sound work from Aitor Berenguer makes an important contribution to the atmosphere of the rig. On the negative side, there are a couple of minor plot inconsistencies, and the twee, pretentious voiceover that opens and closes the pic could have been cut, as it saps crucial power from the coda.

Unsmiling, pathologically private, and all but wordless, deaf factory girl Hanna (Sarah Polley ) uses an enforced vacation to volunteer as a nurse on an oil rig in the Irish Sea , where she tends to Josef (Tim Robbins ), a badly burned worker with enough fight left in him to flirt with his enigmatic attendant and try to coax her out of her strategic silence. Spanish writer-director Isabel Coixet  appears to have made a close study of Lars von Trier 's Breaking the Waves : What pleasure there is to be wrung from the exceptionally banal. The Secret Life of Words  lies in the harsh, unforgiving beauty and wonderfully strange social life of the isolated rig. In due course skeletons will march out of closets, but the movie yields up its secrets with slow reluctance. Which is just as well, since the nagging voices in Hanna and Josef's heads force their way out to reveal inner lives as attenuated and silly as those in Coixet's 2003 My Life Without Me , which made similarly scant use of Polley's prodigious talent.
