
In ''The Sentinel," Jack Bauer is hunting down an old friend who may be trying to assassinate the president. The old friend is played by special guest star Michael Douglas, who looks like he might pass out from exhaustion. Wait -- excuse me? ''The Sentinel" isn't 
an entire season of ''24" smushed into a bland two hours of movie? Does Kiefer Sutherland know?
He spends the film in too-big sunglasses and dark suits, barking commands and tiptoeing around corners with a gun cocked in pursuit of his Oscar-winning suspect. You would think Sutherland would want to use his downtime from that show to wow us with something we didn't already know he could do. Can he dance? Does he juggle? If saving the world isn't yet boring for him, watching him do it in ''The Sentinel" was boring for me.
Fox is behind both the TV program and the movie, the latter being an implicit and dubious brand extension of the former. Sutherland, who seems teeny-tiny on a big screen, plays David Breckinridge, a Bauer-tastic Secret Service agent helping to unravel the plot against President Ballentine (David Rasche). The scheme is coming from within the Secret Service, and all signs point to Douglas's Pete Garrison, the highly respected veteran agent who's spotted at suspicious locations and has just flunked his lie detector test.
Garrison protests his innocence, but goes on the run, anyway. Yet if he seems guilty, he is: of loving the first lady, who's played by the ageless Kim Basinger, in one of Anne Archer's old parts. We spend the whole movie hip to a liaison that no White House agent is bright enough to figure out. Sounds more like the Secret Disservice to me. That affair is the kind of news that would make killing her husband a tasty (and, of course, reprehensible) necessity.
But, oh, were ''The Sentinel" the juicy potboiler it should be. But starting with that starchy title, which is taken from a novel by ex-Secret Service agent Gerald Petievich, the movie won't cop to its trashy impulses. It's as dutiful and humorless as any lesser Harrison Ford vehicle, though not as unforgivable as this year's Ford jalopy, ''Firewall."
''Sentinel" director Clark Johnson, who appears briefly in the film (he's the agent who's murdered in the first minutes), has concentrated on terrific gritty cop shows such as ''Homicide" and ''The Shield." This movie seems like an opportunity for him to do a Tony Scott impersonation, which extends all the way to the noisy horror-flick interludes that purport to approximate the mind of an unseen assassin and the overedited action sequences. Johnson's most persuasive homage to Scott is the camera's persistent leering at the Sexy Female Agent's body, which belongs to Eva Longoria, the most underrated Desperate Housewife.
Longoria is a breezy and mild diversion from the fact that ''The Sentinel" is short on politics and shorter on thrills. TV, nowadays, does the political thriller better, more viscerally, and less predictably. This movie's president isn't a lame duck -- he's lame. The assassins seem obliged to kill him more to keep the plot going than to advance any agenda -- unless that agenda is promoting awareness that our once-formidable leading men seem to be in decline.
Douglas joins Ford in a club of sputtering stars trying to stay relevant in tired commercial dross. It might be time for them to take a page from Clint Eastwood's operating manual and consider the idea of mortality, which his films have spent the last 15 years ruminating. Heroism may never get old, but heroes do, and for Ford and Douglas to keep slugging away at dead material is embarrassing. In Douglas's case, I suppose things could always have been worse. He could have shown up in ''Basic Instinct 2."


         "The Sentinel" is an unassuming thriller, a nifty piece of genre filmmaking without frills or self-importance. It's a throwback, if you will, to the days of B pictures, when formula movies were made with a maximum of skill and a minimum of pretense.
 
  Set in the no-nonsense domain of the U.S. Secret Service, where smiling on duty is apparently a capital offense, "The Sentinel" is made by people who not only believe in telling these kinds of stories, they believe in telling them right.
 


         






    Playing veteran Secret Service operatives Pete Garrison and David Breckinridge, agents who butt heads when an insidious threat imperils the life of the president, are a couple of actors who've done well by wearing badges.
 
  Though Michael Douglas has gone on to more prestigious projects, his "Streets of San Francisco" days are fondly remembered. And Kiefer Sutherland's diligence as "24's" Jack Bauer is about to make him the highest-paid actor in television. As for director Clark Johnson, he has an extensive résumé of TV cop show credits, including such class acts as "The Wire," "NYPD Blue," "Homicide: Life on the Streets" and "Law and Order: Special Victims Unit."
 
  Even before directing, Johnson worked as a performer on such a large number of police shows that he once half-seriously claimed to have played "so many cops in my career as an actor that I know more about cop work than some real cops do."
 
  Like his debut feature, 2003's Samuel L. Jackson-Colin Farrell "S.W.A.T.," "The Sentinel" bears the hallmarks of Johnson's experience as a director: It is briskly done and highly professional, mixing to-the-point conversations with bracing action sequences. The director even takes a cameo, as a Secret Service agent whose murder gets the plot rolling.
 
  As written by George Nolfi (also credited with the abysmal "Ocean's Twelve") from the book by Secret Service agent turned novelist Gerald Petievich, "The Sentinel" centers on agent Garrison (Douglas), the man in charge of security for First Lady Sarah Ballentine (an elegant Kim Basinger).
 
  A devoted service veteran who once took a bullet for President Reagan, Garrison is the kind of guy who still gets up at 4 a.m. every day to stay in protective shape. Douglas, now 61 and aging into someone every bit as determinedly craggy as his father, is completely at home playing a driven perfectionist who knows how to look lean and mean in designer sunglasses.
 
  "The Sentinel" goes to considerable trouble to take us into the world of the Secret Service both visually and verbally. We see (courtesy of production designer Andrew McAlpine) all the paraphernalia of presidential security, from sniffing dogs to binoculars the size of rolling pins, and we hear an inordinate number of people saying "Copy that."
 
  New to this world is fetching rookie agent Jill Marin ("Desperate Housewives' " Eva Longoria), who gets assigned to unimpressed top investigator Breckinridge (Sutherland), who welcomes her with a tart "Aren't you the recruiting poster?" then proceeds to give her grief about her stylish outfit and snarls "résumés don't mean a lot to me."
 
  Breckinridge, it turns out, does a lot of snarling, especially at Garrison. The two were best friends until Something Came Between Them, and now (with Sutherland gaining authority from those years on "24") they never miss an opportunity to go toe to toe and verbally duke it out.
 
  All of this comes to a head when a plot is uncovered to kill the president with the help of (gasp) the first traitor in the service's 141-year history. All evidence points to Garrison, and wouldn't you know it, Breckinridge is a bear at following evidence.
 
  Garrison does have a secret the service doesn't know about, but we know the charge is a frame because traitors don't get up at 4 a.m. to work out. It's still quite a job to convince Breckinridge as well as nail the real bad guys before they do their worst.
 
  "The Sentinel" is helped by Gabriel Beristáin's smooth cinematography, Cindy Mollo's editing and Christophe Beck's energizing score. Yes, it's not always plausible and unapologetically by the numbers, but when the numbers are polished to such a high sheen, it would be next door to treason to complain.
 
 'The Sentinel'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some intense action violence and a scene of sensuality.
 
 A 20th Century Fox release. Director Clark Johnson. Producers Michael Douglas, Marcy Drogin, Arnon Milchan. Screenplay George Nolfi, based on the novel by Gerald Petievich. Director of photography Gab   

Looking back, 1993 was a golden age for thriller cinema. That was the year Hollywood hatched both In the Line of Fire  and The Fugitive , the two obvious and way  superior antecedents for the very humdrum B-movie mash-up The Sentinel . It was also the year of Falling Down , a borderline-nuts drama that Michael Douglas tore through, playing a far less safe, far less boring role. Here, rotely returning to screen (although he does look hale) for the first time since 2003's The In-Laws , Douglas plays Pete Garrison, a veteran Secret Service agent who uncovers, as Clint Eastwood once did, a plan to kill the president. And like Harrison Ford before him, Garrison's gotta run for his life while he clears his name. He's been framed as the mole who's in cahoots with the bad guys. Who are borschty-accented Russians. The movie smells faintly of 1983 as well. Tracking Douglas in the Tommy Lee Jones role is Kiefer Sutherland, who should have graduated from these chintzy by-the-numbers movies to better material by now, given his award-winning success on 24 . (The movie's one rousing scene has Sutherland and Douglas barking at each other in Douglas' living room. These are two actors fun to watch at their highest decibels.) Eva Longoria is the first-day-on-the-job rookie Sutherland improbably takes on as his partner. Her presence is the only irrefutable confirmation that this musty movie was indeed shot in the 21st century.


A half-hearted exercise in political paranoia, "The Sentinel" unravels its wrong-man scenario with business-like efficiency and an impressively jittery visual scheme, but falls far short of providing visceral or emotional thrills. Playing a Secret Service agent who's framed in a conspiracy to assassinate the president, Michael Douglas leads a high-powered cast that simply can't extract any fresh juice from the script's desultory characterizations, which should precipitate quick B.O. flameout following an initial surge of interest in the 20th Century Fox release.
Given the geopolitical ambitions of recent bigscreen thrillers like "Syriana" and "The Interpreter," or the all-terrorism-all-the-time mayhem of Fox TV's "24," there's something almost quaint about a film where a mole in the president's first line of defense -- as opposed to, say, a nuclear bomb scare or a biochemical attack -- constitutes the gravest threat to national security. But next to these superior examples, "The Sentinel" can't help but feel mildly anemic by comparison.
The suspicious murder of a Secret Service agent (helmer Clark Johnson, billed as "Clarque") prompts an internal investigation that has a particularly nasty fallout for veteran agent Pete Garrison (Douglas), who is locked in an ostensibly passionate but tastefully lensed love affair with the woman he's been assigned to protect, First Lady Sarah Ballentine (Kim Basinger).
When Garrison receives an envelope full of incriminating sex photos, his compliance with the blackmailer's demands -- coinciding with a failed attempt on the life of President Ballentine (David Rasche) -- leads him straight into a devious trap.
Subsequent frame-up forces Garrison to go on the lam from his own department while trying to figure out who really wants the president killed, in the process getting his groove back as one of the Secret Service's deadliest and most reliable agents.
Leading the charge to hunt him down are his estranged protege David Breckinridge ("24's" Kiefer Sutherland), fetching rookie Jill Marin (Eva Longoria of "Desperate Housewives") and senior agent William Montrose (the reliably intense Martin Donovan).
Though its plot twists are fairly transparent, George Nolfi's screenplay (adapted from Gerald Petievich's tersely written 2003 novel) could have carried a strong emotional undertow had either of its key relationships been satisfactorily fleshed out. As it is, Garrison's connection with the First Lady never feels intense enough to justify such a blatant indiscretion, while the cause of his falling-out with Breckinridge is so flimsy and undermotivated, even the film seems reluctant to linger over explanations.
Though Douglas, at 61, is arguably past his prime as a professional bodyguard, he supplies Garrison -- an aging legend who once took a bullet for President Reagan -- with both a firm rooting interest and a persuasive sense of world-weary fatigue.
Sutherland is in his ornery element, tossing off some of the script's better lines with sarcastic relish, while Longoria has the thankless job of absorbing the impact. Well, that and being ogled by her male colleagues, a running gag that grows less funny as it becomes increasingly clear the film isn't going to give her anything intelligent or constructive to do.
Compensating for the wan material is helmer Johnson's highly kinetic visual approach, as cinematographer Gabriel Beristain (who also lensed Johnson's "S.W.A.T.") evokes the classic paranoid thrillers of the '70s with his roving, restless camera, snaking zoom lens and sinister interpolation of surveillance-camera footage. Pic derives considerable authenticity from having been shot in Washington, D.C., and Toronto, the site of its climactic summit meeting.
Cindy Mollo's sharp editing works in fluid rhythm with Christophe Beck's electronic score, though the results tend more toward a pleasing sense of percussion than any genuine heightening of suspense.

Brought low by its premise (rogue Secret Service  agent conspires with ex-KGB types to kill the president) and rendered idiotic by its subplot (steamy first lady sneaks off to illicit trysts at the Mayflower Hotel ), this alleged political thriller spells momentary doom for star Michael Douglas . George Nolfi 's screenplay, derived from a Gerald Petievich  potboiler, has more holes than Bush's war plan and employs less fluent English. By the time this dramatic catastrophe staggers into the G8  Summit in Toronto, where wrongly accused veteran agent Pete Garrison  (Douglas) must stop the attempt on the life of President Ballentine (David Rasche ), you might find yourself rooting for the terrorists. Kiefer Sutherland  co-stars as a dogged agency investigator, Kim Basinger 's the wayward Mrs. Ballentine, and Eva Longoria  decorates the movie's fringes as a Secret Service rookie. The lone moment of truth? Upon learning of the assassination plot, Douglas's embattled hero remarks: "I find this pretty far-fetched." Enough said.
