In recent years, Tom Wilkinson has embodied a good priest (The Exorcism of Emily Rose ), a bad mobster (Batman Begins ), a stripper (The Full Monty ), and a man longing to be a woman (Normal ). But not since In the Bedroom , where he so fully filled the sagging contours of a grieving American father and husband, has the superb, substantial British actor had such a chance to shine as he does in the superior British society drama Separate Lies . Playing an upper-crust lawyer whose comfortable life in a marriage based more on shared property and silverware than shared intimacy is blown apart by infidelity and circumstance, Wilkinson once again astonishes with his ability to convey weakness and strength, hypocrisy and gallantry, cruelty and compassion in the same male animal.
And more specifically, in the same English male animal of a certain caste, a species in which the writer-director, Julian Fellowes, takes great sociological delight. Adapting Nigel Balchin's novel A Way Through the Wood  with a sophisticated appreciation of deception and accommodation in the service of a workable reality among grown-ups, the fellow who scripted Gosford Park  makes a promising directorial debut. In Separate Lies , James (Wilkinson) and his silky wife, Anne (Emily Watson), live a well-polished routine of city-home/country-home domesticity, upended when Anne — bored, restless, in a rut of privilege — saunters into an affair with Bill (Rupert Everett), a mischief maker of even greater fiscal means and emotional ennui. An accident, a death, a few secrets kept in complicity, and pretty soon the angles of the relationship geometry shift, and shift again.
Watson excels at sustaining a reckless hunger draped in pearls, and Everett — his handsome face strangely sculpted into a disturbing amalgam of beauty and excess — is frighteningly good at conveying louche hauteur. But it's Wilkinson who embodies everything unexpectedly passionate and actually human about this very particular, very entangled drama. By the hang of his fine suit jacket, the actor conveys a wealth of information about how much a man — no less a man spoiled by privilege — can carry on his shoulders even when his whole world feels like it's crumbling.


Exercising once again the genial/lethal qualities he brought to his Oscar-winning screenplay for "Gosford Park," Julian Fellowes makes his debut as a writer-director with "Separate Lies," an oh-so-British psychological domestic drama. Fans of Merchant and Ivory, Harold Pinter or Agatha Christie will find satisfaction here, as will devotees of Tom Wilkinson and Emily Watson, who will see the thesps limn among their best performances. Modest B.O. looms on the Anglo-friendly specialized circuit.
Tale opens with a hit-and-run accident in which a man on a bicycle is run off the road by a car and left for dead.
Nearby, the marriage of James and Anne Manning (Wilkinson, Watson) is on the verge of collapse. Fellowes captures the idyllic if petrified elegance of their domestic existence with cruel perfection -- homes in both whitewashed London and the country; after-work cricket for him, comfortable boredom for her.
Anne has grown impatient with her older husband, but when she expresses too eager an interest in a young heir dressed in cricket whites, Bill Bule (Rupert Everett), it's all too apparent trouble lies ahead.
But trouble wears two hats in Fellowes' meticulously wrought script. James suspects the newly arrived Bill, an insufferably insouciant, near Euro-trash parody, is involved in the hit-and-run. But while Bill knows who committed the accident and is even willing to take the blame when confronted, someone else was in the car as well.
With Tony Pierce-Roberts behind the camera, "Separate Lies" looks rich, the gray tones of London like pewter. Sound is used as a gentle guide through the remarkable civility of James and Anne's dissolution, their cover-up of a crime and the tensions of a three-way love/conspiracy.
On his directorial outing, Fellowes shows he either has the instincts of Charles Laughton or has absorbed well the lessons of Hitchcock: Anne, preparing dinner while admitting to James her tryst, wields a well-honed kitchen knife with anxious abandon against unoffending parsley, cucumber and avocado.
Fellowes uses the scene to create the kind of white-knuckle stress his characters are feeling. When a punch does get thrown, it's so antithetical to the nature of the story and the people that it's more shocking than most mass murders in B actioners.
In fact, it's the gentleness with which James eventually accepts his fate, and the way Anne resigns herself to hers, that makes the story so engrossing, despite its ambling pace.
Wilkinson, whose increased visibility over the last few years has meant good things for moviegoers, is marvelous to watch; physically, he shrinks from an over-confident London solicitor to a broken cuckold. Watson, never more open or less weird, creates a memorable character in Anne, a woman who knows what she wants.
With "Separate Lies," Fellowes has made a truly adult film -- not because of its content or themes, but because it knows that real drama often lies in the accepted and unspoken realms of life.

The best tragedies of manners rely on the viewer believing that protagonists are driven by binding social constraints to keep up appearances through the most grueling circumstances. Gosford Park  screenwriter Julian Fellowes 's directorial effort attempts that balancing act, but the tale, adapted from Nigel Balchin 's A Way Through the Wood , doesn't quite set motivations at the required angles.
Tom Wilkinson  is aces as James, a respected London solicitor whose young wife, Anne, gets tangled up in ultimately harmful frivolity when he's away. Emily Watson  plays Anne, an expert in ambivalent dissemblance, with a coquettish anguish, as intrigue develops around a hit-and-run killing near their country home. After suspicion falls on local playboy Bill Bule (a chewily droll Rupert Everett ), we learn of Anne's deeper involvement. Plans are hatched as the central pair's marriage crumbles, and James must endure his wife's ongoing affair while parsing the legal and moral implications of the incident. The rub is that fussy, cuckolded James is incrementally trapped into an amoral position. Fellowes's larger goal seems to be making sympathetic characters of Anne and Bule, who for all their lovey-doveyness never emerge as much more than rich twits à la The Great Gatsby —the ones who smash things up and retreat into their carelessness.
Fellowes says in his press notes that he wanted to create a "moral maze." He reminds us that good people do bad things, and bad ones generally have a good side—or at least become quite ill and incur our sympathy. Unfortunately, we're overdosing on those kinds of mitigations. Judging from the current politics in both the U.K. and the U.S., people are all too happy to give powerful bunglers the benefit of the doubt, as if within our manicured hedges there's no such thing as a bad guy at all.
