
"September Dawn" commemorates the Mountain Meadows Massacre of Sept. 11, 1857, in which a party of Mormon militiamen murdered 120 settlers bound for California. True believers probably won't like it, but the sins here are more against good filmmaking than religion. Can a moviegoer ask for blood atonement along with a ticket refund?
All right, the movie isn't that
 bad -- it's just made-for-TV historical treacle that has somehow found its way to the big screen (and barely that; if you want to be moved or outraged by the film, you'll have to travel to Danvers or Revere). Director/co-writer Christopher Cain tells the tale ploddingly, and the script he has written with Carole Whang Schutter hits one cliched note after another with a dull bong.
The facts are these: In 1857, the Mormon faithful under Brigham Young had reached a pitch of near-complete paranoia. Following the murder of founder Joseph Smith in Missouri, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had relocated to Utah. Church leader Young served as territorial governor until revelations of Mormon polygamy prompted Washington to rescind the appointment and send troops to restore the infant theocracy to US control.
The Utah Mormons were convinced they were about to be wiped out. End-times beliefs and a justified persecution complex combined to create a mindset of Branch Davidian proportions -- and into this tinderbox rode the Fancher-Baker wagon train. As soon as Captain Fancher (Shaun Johnston) informs the LDS greeting party in "September Dawn" that his pioneers are from Missouri, we know they're doomed.
After a joint siege of the wagon train by a Mormon militia and local Native American tribesmen, the former lured the settlers out under a white flag -- then shot men, women, and children in cold blood. Twenty years later, after the Civil War had come and gone, one of the ringleaders, John D. Lee, was found guilty and executed. Brigham Young's involvement has been rumored but never proven.
That doesn't stop Cain and Schutter. They wheel on a wild-eyed Young (Terence Stamp) delivering bloody-minded lines taken from the church leader's actual sermons. The major villain of the piece, though, is the fictional Jacob Samuelson, played by a bewhiskered Jon Voight as if he were auditioning for a road-show production of "Gods and Generals." (Between this and "Bratz," it's been a lousy month for the actor.)
As Samuelson is fomenting against the infidels ("May these children of Satan go to Hell, amen," is his way of saying grace), his son Jonathan (Trent Ford) is falling for pretty Emily Hudson (Tamara Hope) of the Fancher party. This deeply unnecessary Romeo-and-Juliet subplot takes up a good chunk of running time, as the two frolic in the moonlit river and argue adorably over theology.
Hope turns in the movie's only convincing performance, although Jon Gries (Uncle Rico from "Napoleon Dynamite"!) is unexpectedly compelling as John D. Lee, here presented as a scapegoat who carried out the will of a maddened people. The massacre itself is a dutifully filmed barbarity, reenacted with balletic slow-motion and discreet fake blood. Then we're back to the lovers and their final passion play.
It's waxy Classics Illustrated cinema, in other words, with special cameos by the director's son, Dean Cain, as the martyred Joseph Smith and Lolita Davidovich ("Blaze") as a rootin' tootin' emigrant who shocks the Mormon elders. "September Dawn" wants to shock them, too, and us in the bargain, but it only serves to remind us of one of the uglier chapters in American history. For the details, find a book.


 The maudlin, grotesque western “September Dawn,” about the  massacre on  Sept. 11, 1857,    of  about 120 settlers by Mormons  (and their  Paiute Indian mercenaries),  apes “Schindler’s List” in hopes of creating a Christian Holocaust picture.  Directed by Christopher Cain (“Young Guns”)  and written   by Mr. Cain and  Carole Whang Schutter (after  Ms. Schutter’s novel), “Dawn”  commemorates the mass murder     of horse-traders and their families  traveling through Utah Territory on their way to California from Arkansas. The Mormons already wish ill upon the sugar-sweet  settlers, but their ire blossoms when a teenage Mormon named Jonathan Samuelson (Trent Ford),  son of the glowering Mormon bishop Jacob Samuelson (Jon Voight), falls for one of the wagon-train party, a kindly gal (Tamara Hope).  In flashbacks and framing devices that feature a bewigged Terence Stamp as Brigham Young and Dean Cain as Joseph Smith, founder of Mormonism, “Dawn” alludes to the persecution that the insular, polygamist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints endured in the early 19th century.  But these aspects are eclipsed  in the film by the Mormons’ Snidely Whiplash-like  treachery. Their evil is established in an early sequence that cross-cuts between two dinner-table prayers: the  travelers wishing the Mormons well, and Jacob urging God to please send Satan’s children to hell, amen — in a grimly righteous tone that begs for the punch line, “Now please pass the ham.”    “September Dawn” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for violence.

A bloody but little-known chapter of Mormon history gives director Christopher Cain plenty of ammo for a stinging attack on religious extremism in "September Dawn." With one eye fixed on current world events, this handsome indie Western damningly recounts the 1857 slayings of 120 settlers passing through Utah, but the didactic presentation, grim speechifying and tacked-on love story all signify a less-than-healthy regard for the audience's intelligence. Limited commercial prospects will depend on the film's ability to exploit Mormon outrage -- the louder, the better -- with its angry and contentious view of a still-disputed tragedy.
Taking a page from "Titanic" and "Pearl Harbor," Cain and co-scenarist Carole Whang Schutter have cooked up a doomed romance as an easy point of entry for young auds in particular. Pic otherwise aspires to a certain degree of authenticity, especially in its climactic re-enactment of the Mountain Meadows Massacre, details of which were drawn from the written confession of John D. Lee (the only person ever convicted and executed for his role in the atrocities).
The film goes one step further, alleging a cover-up of the fact that the killings were ordered by Lee's adoptive father, Brigham Young. As played by Terence Stamp with an ugly, ever-present scowl, the man who presided over the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from 1847 until his death in 1877 emerges onscreen as a pitiless, self-righteous monster, with a band of fanatical followers ever in his grip. 
Chief among these followers is Jacob Samuelson (Jon Voight), the bishop and leader of a Mormon community in southern Utah. When a California-bound wagon train arrives, led by kindly Capt. Fancher (Shaun Johnston), Samuelson allows the settlers to rest in the nearby Mountain Meadows for two weeks, but secretly instructs his sons, Jonathan (Trent Ford) and Micah (Taylor Handley), to keep a close watch on these "Gentile dogs." 
Unlike Micah (a naive but precocious little polygamist), Jonathan is the story's token Mormon with a conscience -- good-looking, sensitive, the only man in town without a wife or two. He easily befriends the pioneers, employing his devastatingly sexy whisper to tame first a wild stallion, then the heart of a fetching blonde lass, Emily (Tamara Hope); she, in turn, helpfully quotes Scripture ("Judge not, lest ye be judged") that leads Jonathan to question his father's absolutist ways.
First half of "September Dawn" is middling frontier soap opera, marred by occasionally stilted dialogue and thesps who aren't always at ease with the period diction. But the pic darkens irrevocably as Samuelson and the townsfolk descend into maniacal bloodlust: Convincing themselves that the settlers were involved in the murder of Joseph Smith (played by Dean Cain, the helmer's son, in gray-toned flashback) and other Mormon prophets, they demand justice in the form of "blood atonement." 
A violent montage, overlaid with excerpts from Young's own writings, elucidates this chilling doctrine -- that sinners must be redeemed not through faith in Christ, but through their own bloodshed.
Perversely, then, Young, Samuelson and their hysterical ilk see themselves as mercy killers, meting out salvation in the form of death. At Samuelson's insistence, Lee (Jon Gries) pressures the local Paiute Indians to attack the wagon train, but the resulting siege merely sets the stage for a bloody coup de grace that leaves no doubt about the true villains of the piece. 
Auds may rightly recoil from the graphically staged finale, with its almost fetishistic focus on the guttings of women and children, all shot in slow-mo and edited together in a flurry of impressionistic dissolves. It's not torture porn; it's massacre porn.
Cain's portrait of sanctimonious hypocrisy is certainly unflinching, encouraging viewers to draw their own parallels between modern-day and Latter-day terrorists (and carefully emphasizing that the Utah slayings took place on Sept. 11, 1857). But the pic is ultimately less interested in understanding its Mormon characters than in demonizing them, and a ham-fisted obviousness undermines scene after scene (such as one that juxtaposes the travelers' heartfelt prayers with Samuelson's fire-and-brimstone denunciations). Nor does the pic convey any insights into the psychology of extremism, aside from some choice moments in Voight's persuasively complex performance.
Well-scouted Calgary locations are beautifully photographed by Juan-Ruiz Anchia, showing off sun-dappled pastures and mountainous landscapes to good effect, though a dearth of establishing shots deny the pic a coherent sense of geography. William Ross' elegiac, sometimes overpowering score provides sturdy support throughout.

One of the American indies least likely to appear at Sundance, September Dawn  recounts the grim tale of the 1857 Mountain Meadows massacre, wherein the men, women, and children on a California-bound wagon train of Missouri  settlers were slaughtered by irate Mormons.
Paranoia informed religious fanaticism: The Mormons themselves had been persecuted, in Missouri and elsewhere, before making their exodus to the Utah  territory (which the federal government had recently placed under martial law). The Mountain Meadow massacre also occurred on September 11. Occult coincidence reinforces paranoia: Director Chris Cain  makes the jihad comparison explicit in a flashback to the Missouri pogrom, where the Mormon maximum leader declares, "I will be to this generation a second Muhammad. Joseph Smith  or the sword!"
Mountain Meadows' unresolved controversies include the degree to which Smith's successor Brigham Young  (Terence Stamp ) was involved in planning the atrocity. Although September Dawn  suggests that Young lied under oath and let one of his commanders take the fall, it places the blame on a fictional Mormon bishop (steely Jon Voight ), who claims to have been informed by a celestial Smith that the Gentiles are cursed and soon has his congregation shouting for "blood atonement." Meanwhile, as the wagon train wends its way through Mormon territory, a certain amount of fraternization transpires. The bishop's boy (Trent Ford ) locks eyes with a settler girl (Tamara Hope ). A pastor's daughter, she befuddles him by quoting gentle Jesus; he's the product of a cruel and punitive God whom he hopes to elude by tagging along to Cali .
Shot in a style that might be termed Americana gravitas, September Dawn  has the ham-fisted lyricism of political ads and pharmaceutical commercials. The schematic script is further burdened with heavy ironies and hackneyed dialogue. Everyone declaims their lines except for Hope; she swallows hers. The massacre, replete with knifing and bludgeoning, is rendered in slo-mo superimpositions and accompanied by celestial keening. The discovery of the atrocity is no less awful. One would need to be Shakespeare  to truly script these scenes. Despite the presence of a Mormon Romeo and settler Juliet, co-writers Cain and Carole Whang Schutter  aren't.
