 The clang of swords mixes with the sounds of the whispering wind, rustling leaves, singing birds and the occasional unsettling din of Norwegian black-metal music in “Severed Ways: The Norse Discovery of America,” which tracks two Vikings lost in the New World in 1007. Independent to the nth degree, the movie is the mad creation of  a young American, Tony Stone, who not only wrote, directed and edited  “Severed Ways,” but, as one of the warriors, also slaughters a chicken and defecates on screen. Standing in the forest at one point, he even begins head-banging, thrashing hair so luxurious that it’s a wonder that he isn’t scalped immediately.  The inspiration for this D.I.Y. epic — part art-cinema oddity, part home-movie extravaganza — is the real expedition by Thorfinn Karlsefni, an Icelander who planned to settle in the New World. Karlsefni hoped to inhabit an area on the northeast coast of Newfoundland that Leif Ericson  had set eyes on seven years earlier and named Vinland. (The movie was shot in Newfoundland and on land in rural Vermont owned by Mr. Stone’s family.) The settlement didn’t last because the Vikings had a nasty habit of slaying native peoples, whom they called skraelings. This penchant for killing at first sight, the historian Jared Diamond has dryly noted, “was not a promising start to establishing friendships.”  “Severed Ways” opens with the two errant Vikings, Orn (Mr. Stone, the blond) and Volnard (Fiore Tedesco, the brunet), leaving a beach littered with the bodies of men pierced with arrows. Determined to find others of their kind, they set off across breathtaking vistas and head into the past (via flashback), their dreams and encounters with man and beast. Mr. Stone, working with two cinematographers and shooting in digital, makes the most of the natural terrain, capturing its rough beauty in long shots and close-ups that convey the travelers’ evolving intimacy with their surroundings. He skillfully conveys this same change through the montage and framing, as his initially intentionally choppy cuts and Cubistic imagery give way to more unhurried edits and classic tableaus.  Not much happens, even as everything does. The two Vikings, speaking minimal, sometimes amusingly translated and idiomatic dialogue in Old Norse (“We’re toast if we stay here”), construct a shelter, build a fire, trudge through the woods, occasionally bicker and trudge some more. Mr. Stone, who studied with the independent filmmakers Peggy Ahwesh and Adolfas Mekas at Bard College, clearly has no use here for the ups and downs of conventional narrative. Instead, he pays scrupulous, almost loving attention to the details of survival (the Vikings chop a lot of wood) and to how being immersed in this strange world changes the men physically, existentially and spiritually, how it gets under their nails, rubs into their skin and finally settles into their souls.  This, at least, suggests the movie’s loftier ambitions, if not what always transpires on screen. Though there’s no doubt that Mr. Stone is as serious as a heart attack when it comes to creating an air of authenticity — hence the sloppily butchered chickens and authorial defecation — he never settles on a coherent tone for the movie. The idioms, excrement and heavy-metal flourishes certainly goose up the gritty realism, but they also undermine the movie’s moments of grandeur. (Given the Nazi fascination with Norse myths, the decision to use music by Burzum, a favorite of white supremacists, is unfortunate at best.) In one scene Mr. Stone manages to invoke Werner Herzog; in the next  his characters are running around like costumed geeks at a comic-book convention.  That said, American independent cinema could use more young filmmakers who go off the story grid. Far too many,  having embraced the workshop maxim “write what you know” with grave literalness, seem to believe (wrongly) that their first loves, screwy families and adolescences merit their own movies. Yet in drawing heavily from their lives, few end up being able to transcend the narrow confines of their  stories, to push past the realm of the self. “It is a delicious thing to write,” Flaubert rejoiced, “no longer to be oneself, but to circulate in the whole creation one speaks of.” If nothing else, Mr. Stone, from his tangled hair to dirty feet, has taken himself and his story into the beyond  —   way, way beyond.

"Pathfinder" meets "Gerry" in "Severed Ways: The Norse Discovery of America," a striking and virtually wordless story of two Vikings separated from their tribe and left to stumble through the North American wilderness. Blending heavy metal and opera, first-time director Tony Stone unlocks a previously unexplored connection between hand-bangers and Vikings, creating what will seem to some an idyllic meditation on primitive man overwhelmed by his surroundings, and to others, the folly of two guys playing dress-up in the woods. Given Stone's emphasis on introspection over action, casual audiences are likely to be bored and confused, severely limiting the pic's prospects.
"Severed Ways" opens with the smoldering remains of a Viking encampment 1,000 years ago. Only two survivors remain, Orn (Stone) and Volnard (Fiore Tedesco), left for dead among the still-breathing corpses -- an early warning of the semi-amateur production values to come. Not much for chit-chat (which is just as well, since the Old Norse dialogue is presented in contemporary-sounding subtitles), they are the Jay and Silent Bob of the New World, long-haired stoner types who conclude, "We're toast if we stay here," before heading for high land.
In the woods, they use their battle axes to chop down trees and build a makeshift shelter, visiting a nearby creek for some good old-fashioned spear fishing. They catch a salmon, eat the "really killer" meal with bare fingers, then excrete it on camera the following morning, gingerly wiping themselves with fresh-plucked leaves. Stone and Tedesco aren't so much acting as re-enacting, like a pair of Viking enthusiasts who've roped a camera crew into recording their experiment in back-to-basics living.
Though amorphous plot and pacing meander for a good hour, the story begins to take shape when Orn and Volnard stumble across a pair of monks who've broken free of their Viking captors and built a makeshift chapel in the woods. Orn kills one monk outright; in an uncharacteristic act of decency, Volnard spares the other (David Perry).
That simple act of compassion introduces a welcome new wrinkle into Stone's Hobbesian vision of early American life -- solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short -- suggesting peace might in fact be possible. However, as history tells us, the Vinland settlement was short-lived, which means it's only a matter of time before the Vikings' warlike nature proves their undoing.
Orn and Volnard eventually part company, leading to the most compelling chapter: "Separation" (each of the film's seven segments is introduced in garish red letters, a punk touch in an otherwise spartan film). Cut off from Orn, Volnard reaches out to the surviving monk, bonding with this Christian stranger in a way that seems almost civilized.
Elsewhere in the forest, an Abenaki woman (Noelle Bailey) fixates on Orn from afar, drugging and raping the Viking stranger. Such behavior seems to contradict the natives' hostility toward these "white beasts," but fits with Stone's bohemian fantasy, in which he is both aggressor and innocent -- and possibly also the unwitting sire of a new Viking-Abenaki legacy.
If only Stone's elliptical storytelling style were as lucid as his eye for the environment. From the moment the Vikings step from the beach into the virgin woods, the jerky camerawork settles into steadier hands, allowing auds to appreciate the characters' majestic surroundings (which include scenes set at L'Anse aux Meadows, an actual 11th-century Viking settlement in Newfoundland).
By shooting in super-widescreen HD, Stone was able to disappear into the wilderness -- and his character -- with minimal crew. Relying exclusively on natural light, the digital picture sacrifices the finer colors and details that might have appeared on film.

Should someone have stopped Tony Stone  before he spent months in the Vermont  wilderness resurrecting the age of Leif Ericson  with a couple of helmets and a moody MP3 player? Does a Viking shit in the woods? The answer to both questions is (a graphically depicted) yes, but, still, a "gritty debut feature" about two Norsemen lost in Greenland  doesn't come along every day. We catch up with Orn and Volnard, the last survivors of their expedition, as they press inland, encountering stranded monks, hot natives, and fresh fish. Shot in dizzy-making handheld HD by sylvan light, and slangily subtitled, the film is a kind of earnest stunt, like the soundtrack's niche-courting black-metal bliss-outs. But the spectacle of two dudes mucking about in the primal forest becomes tedious as Stone embraces a '70s dippiness that evokes the worst of The Hired Hand , leans hard on Brian Eno , and indulges in retro-sounding waterlogged audio. Sure, it's awesome when Orn matter-of-factly brains the conversion-minded monk whom Volnard has befriended. But when wandering Orn—played, by the way, by Stone himself—is slipped a berry roofie by a babelicious Greenlander and ridden to Thorgasm, the whole endeavor officially becomes obscene.
