Who knew that the breakup of the Soviet bloc would be such a boon to the slasher-film industry? Severance , a British hack-'em-up, might be described as Friday the 13th  with better motivation. Seven employees of a multinational arms company pay a visit to Hungary — and wind up getting picked off, in the woods, by a ghoulish pack of military renegades. The chintzy characters, hair-raising deaths, and one spectacular rocket-launcher joke aren't enough to give Hostel  a run for its blood, but they will keep the desensitized occupied.

 Ever since Bram Stoker gave Count Dracula a Transylvanian lineage, Eastern Europe has been a familiar setting for horror tales. "Severance" continues the tradition by turning a corporate retreat in a Hungarian forest into a bloody game of whack-a-mole. (Team building and paintballing are so last year.)  Our unsuspecting moles are a grumpy group of pencil-pushers employed by an international weapons manufacturer who find themselves marooned in a rundown lodge. Outside are land mines, bear traps and balaclava-wearing commandos; inside are spiders, rotting floorboards and a file cabinet with dusty records of the attackers, who are either asylum escapees or Balkan war criminals. Kind of a Hobson's choice, really.  Briskly directed by Christopher Smith (who also contributed to the screenplay), "Severance" overcomes its narrative deficiencies with inventive bloodletting and no small amount of wit. (A scene involving resourceful call girls and a lifeline made of lingerie is particularly impressive.)  The film's political argument may be broad, even if there is some satisfaction in seeing the gung-ho team leader hoisted by his own explosive petard.  Mr. Smith's visual technique, however, is exceedingly sharp, giving the film a dizzying sense of threat and disorientation.  Despite thinly drawn characters and a predictable order of fatalities (look out, socially awkward nerd!), "Severance" is a lively romp through terrain less traveled than you might think.  "Severance" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has decapitation, dismemberment, drugs and scantily clad women.

After the blah Franka Potente starrer, "Creep," British helmer Christopher Smith more than comes up with the goods in slasher pic "Severance," his sophomore trip to the genre well. Escalating blend of black humor and grisly goings-on in the wilds of Hungary fully delivers in its latter half, and drew whoops and gasps during packed screenings at South Korea's PiFan fantasy fest. With a fair wind, some juicy theatrical action -- followed by robust ancillary -- looks to be in the cards for this Aug. 25 release in Blighty. U.S. distrib Magnolia has set no opening date as yet.
With a whammo opening that only becomes clear near the end of the movie, pic follows the European sales team of multinational arms supplier Palisade Defence, sent on a team-building weekend in Central Europe. Stranded when the road is blocked by a fallen tree, and then abandoned by their Hungarian driver, the team, led by stiff-upper-lip Richard (Tim McInnerny), has to leg it through the forest to find the luxury lodge of Palisade's Yank exec, George (David Gilliam).
Dysfunctional, raggedy bunch includes womanizing, Cockney pothead Steve (Danny Dyer), hunky yuppie Harris (Toby Stephens), geeky Gordon (Andy Nyman), Richard's assistant, Billy (Babou Ceesay), Brit brunette Jill (Claudie Blakley) and Canuck blonde Maggie (Laura Harris). What they find is not a swanky lodge but a rundown building with dusty files on Serbian lowlifes in the basement.
Onscreen chemistry and humorous exchanges among the group take a while to click, and direction in the opening reels is uneven. But the pic's off-kilter approach starts to cohere in a section where Harris, Jill and then Steve spin wild stories about what the old lodge used to be -- all visualized as brief movies-within-the-movie.
The film starts ratcheting up the scares from the halfway point as Jill gets up during the night for a drink of water. Nicely modulated sequence, full of false alarms prior to the actual surprise, sets the style for helmer Smith's approach to his subsequent setpieces.
Casual way in which special effects are thrown at the viewer pays dividends as the story progresses. As the violence mounts, film's comic shock value comes as much from the way in which no cast member is spared as from what's actually shown onscreen. In that respect, "Severance" is a long way from formula slasher fare.
One gag in particular, involving the gung-ho George and a rocket launcher, is a guaranteed roof-raiser for its sheer audaciousness and political cheekiness.
Dyer ("Human Traffic," "The Great Ecstasy of Robert Carmichael") and Harris slowly dominate the goings-on, but it's the increasingly outrageous action that becomes the real star of the movie.
Technical package is fine on a budget, and locations in Hungary and the U.K.'s Isle of Man are blended seamlessly. Original script's title was "P45," the English name for the form employees get upon job severance.

The idea of "getting axed" is exploited for maximum double-entendre value in Severance , a grisly horror-comedy from the U.K. that has its tongue planted so firmly in its cheek that you half expect it to pop out the other side. Yes, heads (and, in one indelible bit, a severed foot) roll during the course of the "team-building weekend" embarked upon by seven employees of global weapons manufacturer Palisade Defence. ("We'll win the war on terror," intones the ebullient narrator of a corporate promotional video. "I certainly hope not," replies one savvy staffer.) Deep into the Hungarian countryside they go, en route to a supposedly luxurious resort. Instead, they find themselves waylaid at an eerily depopulated villa where someone—possibly a disgruntled former client—has a bone to pick with the Palisade powers-that-be. In the international arms business, it would seem, the return policy is a real killer.
Directed by Christopher Smith , who also co-authored the script with first-time screenwriter James Moran , Severance doesn't beat around the bush: The movie opens with a flash-forward to its own frenetic climax, as a trio of soon-to-be victims run for their lives through a dense forest, pursued by an unseen assailant and a shaky hand-held camera. The images will seem instantly familiar to connoisseurs of le cinéma du torture porn, only instead of the requisite shrieking fright music on the soundtrack we get the Small Faces singing "Itchycoo Park," complete with its groovy assurance that "It's all too beautiful." No, Severance isn't your garden-variety torture porn; it slices and dices with a wink and a nod to the Economist  crowd. It's the kind of movie that people who look down their noses at the Saw and Hostel  franchises can feel OK about liking because, you know, it's a satire —the Dr. Strangelove of Taliban -era blowback. At least, that's what Smith seems to think, judging by another of his irreverent music selections: the WWII standard "We'll Meet Again" played over the end credits.
But unlike Kubrick's film, to say nothing of a whole spate of recent movies (including The Host and Land of the Dead ) that have employed genre as a means of social criticism, Severance  isn't a sustained work of imagination. Part of the problem is that Smith and Moran play fast and loose with the identities of the masked henchman who spend most of the movie's running time thinning the Palisade employment rolls. Are they Soviet-era war criminals? Ceausescu loyalists from neighboring Romania ? Or maybe a rival arms seller on a team-building excursion of its own? The vagueness is intentional—the point being that whoever the "bad" guys are, the "good" guys were probably the ones who militarized them in the first place—but after a while, it gives the movie a fuzzy feeling, like a spoof that hasn't quite figured out what it's spoofing.
Not that Smith and Moran are that much sharper when it comes to the Palisade faithful, who register less as actual characters than as character types of the sort one might find in a bad dinner-theater knock-off of The Office . There's Steve (Danny Dyer ), the laid-back stoner-slacker with the devil-may-care glint in his eyes; Harris (Toby Stephens ), the golden-boy sales champ; Gordon (Andy Nyman ), the overly enthusiastic corporate cheerleader; Richard (Tim McInnerny ), the odious upper-management tyrant; Maggie (Laura Harris ), the office hottie; Jill (Claudie Blakley ), the practical-minded wallflower; and Billy (Babou Ceesay ), the token black guy. Fortunately, most of them are dispensed with rather quickly.
Severance is chock-full of nifty sight gags, like that severed foot being jammed into a small portable fridge, or the sedated body of its former owner being dragged out of a room while two of his co-workers sit on a nearby sofa none the wiser. As a director, Smith (whose debut feature, the subway-set thriller Creep , was a modest hit overseas but remains undistributed in this country) has the sensibility of one of those single-panel comic-strip artists, like Gary Larson  or Jim Unger , with a knack for deadpan absurdism and an appetite for the macabre. (You can also see the influence of filmmakers like the Coen Brothers  and Sweden 's Roy Andersson .) But when Smith's Grand Guignol tableaux are strung together, they lack any forward momentum. Some take inspired comic flight. The rest crash to the ground and, like so much else in Severance , go splat.
