 The screenwriter Daniel Waters has some funny films to his name, notably the influential 1989 “Heathers” — Diablo Cody, who wrote “Juno,” should send him royalty checks — but “Sex and Death 101” is not one of them. His second venture doing double duty as writer and director (“Happy Campers,” 2001, was the first), “Sex and Death” is an unfortunate comedy about sex and love and all those things that can prevent a man from getting from one to the other, including (ostensibly) hot  lesbian sex, (notionally) hot nonlesbian sex, (generically) hot girls licking spoons and hot (teenage) girls in school uniforms. And so it goes until this prince uncharming realizes he wants something, you know, more meaningful.  In other words, “Sex and Death” is a hard-boiled fantasy with a squishy center. The man in question is a single guy with the kind of name usually  found next to a couple of X’s, Roderick Blank (Simon Baker), a looker whose bland existence derails when he receives a list naming all 101 women he will bed before he dies. The list puzzles him, as does the revelation of three guys in gray suits, Alpha (Robert Wisdom), Beta (Tanc Sade) and Fred (Patton Oswalt), who hang out in a white room weighing the fate of mortals and have some connection with the roll call. As these three rehearse the all-seeing, all-knowing routine, Roderick takes the opportunity to dump his castrating fiancée and liberate his inner player.  The appealing Mr. Baker never manages to find the right tone for the material, partly because he’s been seriously miscast (he radiates too much decency and intelligence for the role), though more because Mr. Waters never establishes a coherent tone for either the character or his situation. As Roderick makes his way down his list, he veers unpersuasively from glib to crude, mawkish and desperate, with a little limp screwball and frantic mugging tossed in. The film generally remains unfunny, but in different registers. What Mr. Waters appears to have been after is the kind of crude romp that brings to mind the hustling likes of Dudley Moore, whose moves could have been synched to “The Benny Hill Show” and probably were.  Oh, yes, Winona Ryder, who memorably starred in “Heathers,” shows up periodically as Death Nell, a mysterious vamp with a Black Widow complex and some nasty black heels. I’m not exactly sure what she’s doing in this film, and I don’t believe that Mr. Waters or Ms. Ryder know either.  “Sex and Death 101” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The many naked breasts may disturb certain men and hungry babies.

A promising concept is gradually run into the ground in "Sex and Death 101," a would-be black comedy that lacks both laughs and gravity. Racy subject matter, the marquee appeal of the rarely seen Winona Ryder, and the occasional protrusion of plastic breasts guarantee some aud interest, but bet-hedging blandness and weak production values make this anodyne sex romp best suited to cable and vidstore crypts.
Aussie up-and-comer Simon Baker has almost enough charm to carry the day, but even that wears thin when he's asked to provide the emotional center of a tale that is more silly than sinful.
Baker plays fast-food potentate Roderick Blank --handsome, successful (although we never see him working) and a killer with the ladies. Yet he's initially ready to give up the bachelor life to wed one of many interchangeable blonds the pic presents as the face of standard-issue desire. Trouble comes when he receives an odd email containing the names of all the women he has ever slept with -- or will
 ever sleep with.
One can see how such knowledge might add confusion to already chilled feet, and Rod soon ankles the wedding in favor of easy pickings. Against the advice of a trusted assistant (Mindy Cohn, doing well with her feisty-lesbian shtick), he rushes headlong into his prefab pornucopia. As presented by writer-director Daniel Waters, who scripted the influential "Heathers," the sexual situations are utterly lacking in heat or suspense -- which may be the point for a guy knowing exactly who will next butter his buns, but it makes chilly viewing for the rest of us.
Pic is routine in all other aspects. Surprisingly, respected lenser Daryn Okada's images are barely above tube level, with sleek sitcom the dominant design mode here. Only contrast comes from white-on-white segs repping some kind of sci-fi purgatory where Rod goes to figure out what's happening to him. These are arresting, but use of a single set and similar jokes quickly becomes repetitive.
More enervating is the monotonous dialogue, which has the same brand of writerly locutions spilling from almost every mouth. Since Roderick and his pals are simply stock guy characters, and most of the women -- including Leslie Bibb as a veterinarian (with no practice) whom Roddy falls in love with -- are more like models than people, the satire feels both sour and unrooted. Pic is also riddled with implausibilities, such as the notion that our horny hero would hang onto the email list for dear life but never look at the last name on it.
That handle, as viewers will guess, has to be Death Nell, a goth-clad gal notoriously knocking men unconscious across the country. Fortunately, this is Ryder's part, and the former Heather -- despite a nonsensical explanation about what turned her into an avenging angel -- manages to invest it with some needed humanity. In their climactic scene together, the leads evidence a chemistry elsewhere missing from the proceedings.
Playing it safe throughout, Waters ensures the conventional music, staging, and phallo-centric humor can all add up to a happy ending that congratulates viewers for skirting the margins of sex and death while never even getting close to the abyss.


Writer-director Daniel Waters , who scripted Heathers  eons ago, inexplicably keeps gigging. Here, the name of the game is dull vulgarity trading as "deliciously dark" comedy—punchline sex with dwarfs, the dead, the infirm elderly, etc. Douche-nozzle Roderick Blank (Simon Baker ), a thirtyish company man, is on the brink of matrimony when he receives a mysterious e-mail containing the names of all his sex partners up until then . . . as well as the names of twice as many more. Once the list's power of prophecy is confirmed at his bachelor party, he shakes free to go on a rampage down his magical file of sure things. There's a decidedly throwback air to the whole endeavor, from the presence of Winona Ryder  and The Facts of Life 's Natalie to its distinctly "Take Back the Night" sexual politics, as the city's licentious fiends are bumped off by a female serial killer (Ryder), dubbed "Death Nell" by the press. Stupid monikers are just one symptom of a stultifying, overwritten cleverness that substitutes quirk for character.
