 Jeff Nichols’s “Shotgun Stories,” a drama about warring clans of brothers in small-town southern Arkansas, defines the classic western phrase “doing what a man’s got to do” as both a moral imperative and a biological compulsion. The movie is filled with unremarkable men who would rather die than appear weak.  The doom-spiral narrative of “Shotgun Stories” starts with the death of the patriarch, Hayes, who sired two clans of boys with two women. In his first marriage he was a violent alcoholic who never gave his children proper names; to this day they’re known only as Son (Michael Shannon), Kid (Barlow Jacobs) and Boy (Douglas Ligon).  The old man walked out on his family, then became sober, remarried, came to Jesus and had four more sons: Cleaman (Michael Abbott  Jr.), Mark (Travis Smith), Stephen (Lynnsee Provence) and John (David Rhodes). The second Hayes family owns a cotton and soybean farm and is comfortably middle class. Son, in contrast, works at a fish hatchery and lives in a shack near a freeway: his wife, Annie (Glenda Pannell), recently took their son, Carter (Cole Hendrixson), and moved out because, Son says, she was tired of his gambling. Kid sleeps in a tent in Son’s yard, and Boy lives in a van by the river.  When the father dies, his first three sons crash his funeral. Son calmly declares that just because the elder Hayes reformed doesn’t make him a good man, then spits into the open coffin.  Much of the film’s ensuing violence is staged obliquely or kept off camera, but it’s still shocking because of its juxtaposition with mundane images of daily life. Childish insults, cruel pranks and awkward assaults coexist with middle-school basketball practices and trips to the grocery store and carwash.  The feud’s main players know they’d all be better off if they stopped fighting, but they keep sabotaging peace offerings with huffy macho taunts.  Mr. Nichols and his cinematographer, Adam Stone — the longtime second-unit photographer for the filmmaker David Gordon Green, who helped produce “Shotgun Stories” — often frame their tortured, self-destructive  characters within wide shots of depopulated streets, verdant fields and placid bodies of water, acknowledging the beauty these men are too self-involved by rage to see.  The cast’s detailed but subtle performances deepen Mr. Nichols’s characters in ways that become clear only upon second viewing. Mr. Shannon’s constricted line readings and prematurely aged gait suggest the patriarchal burdens that Son bears without complaint. Mr. Ligon’s performance as the slobbish, amiable, easily flustered Boy is the film’s moral center. Shambling through the film’s final third, his bruised face squashed atop a neck brace, he’s a battered Everyman, torn between decency and hate.  “Shotgun Stories” is as cool-headed as its characters are reckless. Not only are there no heart-rending flashbacks to Son, Kid and Boy’s childhoods, but we also never even see a photo of their father. Son’s back is covered with shotgun-pellet scars, but we get only a sketchy account of how he acquired them. The film is a here-and-now American potboiler and a stripped-down parable that can be appreciated by any culture.  It’s telling that the factions disagree on who started this mess. Cleaman, Mark, Stephen and John blame Son’s disruption of the funeral. Son blames his father’s long-ago viciousness, then charges his mother (Natalie Canerday) with demonizing his father’s new family: “You raised us to hate those boys, and we do, and now it’s come to this.”  Son tells his half-brother Stephen, “This started a long time ago.”  Stephen’s reply is as much wish as threat: “Well, somebody’s gonna finish it.

A point-blank buckshot blast of inarticulate American rage, played with the disarmingly placid inevitability of Greek tragedy, "Shotgun Stories" is a precisely modulated yet cumulatively forceful story of a rural family feud turned deadly. Tonal similarity to work of David Gordon Green, one of three producers on the project, will attract immediate interest; sure helming hand and genre trappings of script by first-timer Jeff Nichols will ensure loaded specialty biz and ancillary stockpiling.
The sleepy southeast Arkansas town where drama unfolds is the kind of place where people don't look around when you drive up to meet them; they can tell who you are by the sound of your vehicle and the slam of its door. This is just one of many tide-like contempo rural rhythms of life subtly captured by Little Rock native Nichols.
Though never seen, newly deceased Cleaman Hayes has fathered seven children by two women, with a break for rehab and business success between families. The first three are so blood simple he never gave them proper names: Son (Michael Shannon) is a fish hatchery worker convinced he's about to crack the code at the nearby casino; Kid (Barlow Jacobs) is pondering marriage even though he has no truck and lives in a pup tent; and Boy (Douglas Ligon) spends most of his free time -- make that most of his time, period -- fiddling with his ancient van, but is so lazy and/or slow he tries to rig up a normal-sized air conditioner to the cigarette lighter.
The second batch, clearly the favorites of the late Hayes pere, are led by family man Cleaman (Michael Abbott, Jr.) and include hot-headed Mark (Travis Smith) and older teenagers Stephen (Lynsee Provence) and John (David Rhodes). Unlike the first Hayes brood, they're trying to make a go of a local farm.
When Son spits on his father's casket, Mark later instigates a fistfight among the half brothers. Kid retaliates, with tragic results. At each juncture, local layabout Shampoo Douglas (G. Alan Wilkins) goads Son on.
And so it goes, until the bodies of the Hayes pets, and soon enough, their men, begin to pile up. "You raised us to hate these boys and now we do," Son tells his mother, Nicole (Natalie Canerday), with dispassionate finality. "So it's come to this."
Read as a cautionary tale on the futility of revenge, "Shotgun Stories" is a low-key thriller with the requisite genre tension. Seen another way, in a country where the explanation "to protect my family" might also translate as "cross me and you're dead," pic is something much more subversive. These are rural folk, but Nichols' script grants them a primitive elegance that underscores the timelessness of the conflict, as well as the mindset that created it. "You don't know the square root of shit," math whiz wannabe Son teases his siblings in a rare light moment, but he could well be speaking of the destiny they can't escape.
Thesping is pitch-perfect across the board, with Shannon's early gruffness giving way to Ligon's instinctual nobility. Oppressiveness is leavened slightly by Wilkins' low-keyed comic turn. Tech package is pro, led by Adam Stone's widescreen lensing and pungent score by Ben Nichols and his band, Lucero. Astute prod and costume designs sell the milieu without resorting to caricature.
Camera (color, widescreen), Adam Stone; editor, Steven Gonzales; music, Ben Nichols, Lucero; production designer, Lindsay Millar; costume designer, Rachel Worthen; sound (Dolby Digital), Hayden Jackson; assistant director, Cosmo Pfeil; associate producers, Tisha Gribble, Paul Skidmore. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Forum), Feb. 11, 2007. MPAA Rating: R. Running time: 90 MINS.
 

