 In the overheated, hapless "Slutty Summer,"  waiters hiss at one another throughout the film's daylight hours. Then, when the sun goes down, the same pouty posse gallivants around Manhattan's same-sex cruising spots, voicing fears of being picked up by Mr. Wrong or, worse, left alone altogether.  The film is a labor of love for Casper Andreas, who wrote, directed and starred in this first feature. For the actors he has chosen, it's a labor of lust, with copious necking and grappling required. For the audience, it's just a labor.  The film's biggest disappointment is not the scrappy cast, which features a standout performance by the Welsh-born natural Jamie Hatchett, whose heavy-lidded languor suits his bad-boy Lothario character. In another role, Jesse Archer employs his barbed tongue as a dreamboat who loves 'em, leaves 'em and gracelessly bad-mouths 'em the next day. For her part, Virginia Bryan is an accomplished batter of eyelashes with an unquenchable thirst for the sauce.  Sadly, the weak element is Mr. Andreas, who saved the noble lead role of Markus for himself. Dumped after years of monogamy, Markus attempts to sort though the woes of Splitsville and the sorry prospects for new love, but often his cause becomes too hard to champion. Mr. Andreas has some stilted lines to spit out, and his faint Swedish accent slows what should be some rapid-fire repartee.  He did, however, recognize a story worth telling, and he poses a few interesting questions about how meaningless sex might mask other problems. But this point is delivered in a package that is too loosely wrapped. The East Village gay contingent and the crystal-meth gay contagion deserve a big-budget exploration, a sweet-and-sour saga that might match the West Hollywood valentine that Greg Berlanti, the television writer and producer, delivered in his film "The Broken Hearts Club."  Strangely, given all the talent in that Land of La Chappelle, such a film has not emerged. At the very least, perhaps "Slutty Summer" will prompt some director to fashion a film that deserves a place alongside the heartache Rufus Wainwright has captured in song and the mores that Mike Albo has sent up onstage.
Welcome to Jerry Falwell 's worst nightmare: In the new romantic comedy Slutty Summer , New York exists in an alternate universe populated entirely by gay men. The cast has room for exactly one heterosexual, a struggling actress searching in vain for a decent (not to mention straight) man. She'd have better luck finding one in a monastery. Summer  has an interesting premise—if all men are pigs, gay monogamy may be impossible—but first-timer Casper Andreas  approaches his subject with the subtlety of a wrecking ball. Tired jokes are repeated over and over; one bit about a masturbating restaurant manager gets used three times in one scene alone. Andreas plays the lead, a mopey guy named Markus who embarks on the titular sexpedition after discovering his boyfriend's infidelity. Unfortunately he flubs most of his dialogue; though he wrote the screenplay, Andreas seems incapable of remembering his lines.
One character in Summer  declares, "You can't promise to love someone forever," but the subjects of the compassionate documentary Paternal Instinct  would certainly disagree. Mark and Erik, happily married for 10 years, decide to start a family and employ Wen, an affable witch from Maine , as the surrogate mother. As intimate as a home movie, Instinct  has only one flaw: its length. In this form, there isn't sufficient screen time for Wen, whose motives for participating despite a husband and adolescent son of her own, remain frustratingly obscure. Still, it's difficult not to be won over by Instinct 's humanity; celebrating his own 40th birthday, Mark delivers an unforgettable, heartfelt message to his unborn child. In contrast, the most memorable line from Slutty Summer  is "Hey you! Nice nipples!"
