         It's never easy to create a fictional narrative that fits the specific purpose of promoting a good cause, and for all the usual good intentions, writer-director Jeffrey Kramer with "Smile" has made a plodding, drawn-out, overly long and contrived film in behalf of Operation Smile, which since 1982 has provided free reconstructive surgery for more than 80,000 children and young adults in developing countries. Although Mika Boorem reveals considerable range and conviction in the film's central role, based on Kramer's own teenage daughter and her experiences, "Smile" is like a dose of cod liver oil: It may be good for you, but it's no fun.
 
  Two very different birthdays for 15-year-old girls are being celebrated thousands of miles apart. In Malibu, Boorem's Katie is enjoying a gala at the expensive beachside home of her parents (Beau Bridges, Linda Hamilton), but in a small city several hours' journey from Shanghai, the birthday party for Lin (Yi Ding), a child with a cleft lip, becomes the occasion for the breakup of her family.
 


         






    For the next hour, Kramer cuts back and forth between the unfolding stories of Katie and Lin. Katie responds to her teacher's discussions of the Doctor's Gift program — based on Operation Smile — and she becomes determined to track down Lin. (That Lin's father [Luoyong Wang] is so intent that Lin speak perfect English proves a great convenience.)
 
  Kramer might have made a much better movie if he had avoided the protracted crosscutting and focused on Katie's learning to look beyond herself, thereby bringing her and Lin together much earlier since the plot telegraphs itself anyway.
 
  Hamilton's role is thankless, and Bridges fares much better as Katie's low-key father, but Cheri Oteri is a major irritant as the woman in charge of the American high school volunteers in Shanghai. Oteri, who does not seem to realize she is not in a "Saturday Night Live" skit, mugs shamelessly in a determined effort to call attention to herself at the expense of the film and everyone else in it.
 
 'Smile'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some mature content involving teen sexuality
 
 Times guidelines:
 Some forthright discussion of teen sex involving birth control pills
 
 Mika Boorem
...Katie
 
 Yi Ding
...Lin
 
 Luoyong Wang
...Daniel
 
 Linda Hamilton
...Bridgette
 
 Beau Bridges
...Steven
 
 A Dark Forest LLC presentation of a Konwiser Bros./JSK production. Writer-director Jeffrey Kramer. Producer Kip Konwiser. Executive producer Martin O'Neal. Cinematographer Edward Pei. Music Neil Giraldo. Costumes Kathryn Morrison. Special make-up Stan Winston Studios. Production designer Mayling Cheng. Art directors Bob Quinn, Weide Sun. Running time: 1 hour, 56 minutes. In general release.   


An American girl embarks on a medical mission to China in Jeff Kramer's message-movie "Smile." Well-meaning but dramatically lopsided tearjerker bogs down in generic teen angst and domestic squabbling. Despite a promising bicultural cast and winningly offbeat cameos by Sean Astin and Cheri Oteri, pic fails to convince and is unlikely to find much of a following beyond the philanthropic crowd it's clearly targeting.
Indeed, "Smile" functions more or less as a feature-length promo for Operation Smile, a charity that helps correct facial deformities in children worldwide (and which will receive a portion of the pic's proceeds). While there is surely an honest, affecting movie to be made about international outreach, it would take a subtler emotional register than writer-director Kramer, who based the story on his daughter's real-life experience with the org, delivers.
Two girls share a birthday but little else: While Katie is born into a life of Southern California luxury and privilege, the disfigured Lin is abandoned at birth in a rural Chinese village and is adopted by Daniel (Luoyong Wang). His wife (Jia Song), however, feels Daniel gives preferential treatment to the unattractive foundling and moves out with their son, leaving Daniel to raise Lin by himself.
Despite early attempts at a parallel structure, script quickly puts the China arc on hold and flashes forward to focus on Katie ("Blue Crush's" Mika Boorem), now a high schooler, and the dilemma she faces when her teacher (a goofily self-possessed Astin) announces an upcoming China mission through a program called Doctor's Gift.
Intrigued, Katie nevertheless feels she's dealing with enough problems: She's debating whether or not to sleep with her aggressive boyfriend, Chris (Erik von Detten); engaging in a mild flirtation with more sensitive Ted (Jonathon Trent); and having screaming matches with her parents (Linda Hamilton and Beau Bridges).
But, pic's main point seems to be how trivial the problems of the white upper-middle class are compared with those of the rest of the world, and this seems to be the logic behind Katie's sudden decision to leave for China -- though it's hard to imagine the trip isn't also a good excuse to get away from her shrill mother.
Script shows more finesse in delineating the tensions between Lin and her father, who encourages her to undergo an operation through Doctor's Gift, despite a failed previous attempt.
Wang, easily the least self-conscious thesp on camera, brings warmth and quiet dignity to the long-suffering Daniel. Lin, by contrast, is treated as little more than Katie's project, less a person than a vehicle for the improvement and edification of guilt-ridden Westerners. Characterization of Lin would have benefited if she had been allowed to be a more active agent in her own narrative, or if actress Yi Ding had not been forced to hide her scar -- and her emotions -- behind a veil.
Still, the scene when Lin and Katie finally come face-to-face is undeniably effective, as is the final stretch, which focuses on the moving friendship that develops between the two girls. In a bizarre casting choice that pays off, Oteri puts a benign spin on her giddy "Saturday Night Live" persona as an obnoxious but seasoned volunteer who helps Katie ease in to her new surroundings.
One of the first Western productions in years to lense in China with a government license, pic rises nicely to the visual challenge, with Edward Pei's cinematography shifting between the two environments with considerable ease. Musical arrangements, however -- noisy pop for California, Asian-sounding string and wind instruments for China -- are divisive.
