
Given the truly profligate amount of hype that has preceded it, both online and in what passes for the real world, a movie called "Snakes on a Plane" had better be one of two things: So bad it's good or so good it's great.
Darned if it isn't a little bit of both.
The Samuel L. Jackson action film about -- wait for it -- snakes on a plane turns out to be the Royale with cheese this wilted summer movie season has so desperately needed. It ain't art. It ain't pretty. But it works. Boy, does it work.
A recommendation: If you do intend to see "Snakes," see it in a theater, the more crowded the better. In four months, when you watch it on DVD by yourself, the movie will look like what it is: A B-flick with a brilliant gimmick and extra-strength moxie. Seen with a pumped-up Friday night audience, it's a party. As with "The Rocky Horror Picture Show," the action offscreen is half the fun.
This is what months of Internet buzz brings to the table: A willingness to play along with the low-down values of junk cinema. That "Snakes on a Plane" has the grace to live up to its billing -- that it's muscular, efficient, and balanced expertly between the scary and the ridiculous -- is extra gravy.
What's it about? Duh. If you want particulars, they run like this: A surfer dude named Sean (Nathan Phillips, acting as bad as he can) witnesses a mob rubout by Hawaiian crime lord Eddie Kim (Byron Lawson). He's taken into protective custody by FBI agent Neville Flynn (Jackson) and loaded onto a trans-Pacific red-eye to Los Angeles, where he's meant to testify.
The bad guys, meanwhile, have stuffed the cargo hold with dozens of venomous snakes: Big ones, small ones, cobras, asps, adders. There's a massive boa constrictor, too, and how that one got past airport security is beyond me. To put the beasties in the proper frenzy, they've been dosed with pheromones; as Flynn says, "Well, that's good news: snakes on crack."
Right off the bat, then, the filmmakers pile three phobias on top of each other: Fear of flying, fear of enclosed places, and fear of icky things with fangs. The script (by John Heffernan, Sebastian Gutierrez, and David Dallesandro) does the only sensible thing given this set-up: Exploits it ruthlessly and with bloody good cheer.
Thankfully, the passengers aboard South Pacific Flight 121 are a colorful bunch, divided more or less equally between fools, lunchmeat, and the resourceful. There's, let's see, the germaphobic rap star (Flex Alexander) with the videogame-addict bodyguard (Kenan Thompson); the horny couple (Samantha McLeod and Taylor Kitsch) eyeing the bathroom with mile-high lust; the Latino single mom (Elsa Pataky) with baby; the jerk businessman (Gerard Plunkett); the cute young brothers traveling alone (Casey Dubois and Daniel Hogarth); and the neurotic glamour girl (Rachel Blanchard) with the Chihuahua in her purse. If "Airport 1975" hadn't already gone there, the script would probably have thrown in Helen Reddy as a guitar-playing nun.
Add the plane's flight crew -- tough cookie Claire (Julianna Margulies), gleefully chauvinist co-pilot Rick (the ubiquitous David Koechner), weathered senior flight attendant Grace (Lin Shaye) -- and we've got ourselves a clambake. Oh, did I mention the lightning storm?
The snake attacks, when they finally come, are brutal indeed, and director David R. Ellis plays them for gross-out comic shock. They keep coming, too, out of every orifice and crawl space a jumbo jet has to offer. When one of the characters says, "I've got a [bleep] snake on my [bleep]!" you can fill in the blanks with just about anything you want. Much has been made about the film's mid-production shift from PG-13 to hard R, and you can tell where they've upped the ante. That would be the unlucky man who doesn't check the toilet bowl before unzipping. Add one more phobia to the list.
The snakes? They're computer-generated critters, out-sized and aggressive enough to be freaky-deaky but not realistic enough to induce genuine terror in anyone but the characters. Sharp editing and a relentless pace cover the cracks, keeping the movie from tipping over into a place where we're laughing at it rather than with it.
The dialogue plays closer to the fire; that's the big, dumb fun of the thing. When the old-timer flight attendant sighs, "Last month they offered early retirement. But no -- this old broad wanted one more tour of duty," you know the writers aren't gunning for an Oscar. "Snakes on a Plane" is packed with felicitous boilerplate like that, and only one line doesn't work: Jackson's pre-celebrated "I've had it with these [expletive] snakes on this [expletive] plane!"
That was the catch-phrase demanded by the internet hordes, and it's obvious the filmmakers shot it at a later date and awkwardly shoehorned it in. The audience cheers -- they have to; it's their handiwork -- but it's the only time "Snakes" feels like it's pandering to the crowd rather than messing with its head. You can suck up to moviegoers only so long before you turn smug.
In every other respect, Jackson is The Man, and he bestrides this film with the authority of someone who knows the value of honest bilge. He's as much the auteur of this baby as the director and screenwriters, and that fierce glimmer in his eye is partly joy. "Snakes on a Plane" became a phenomenon unseen because its title 'fessed up to the jokey, propulsive thrills we sometimes want from movies. It'll remain a phenomenon -- at least while it's in theaters -- because it delivers them.


Snakes on a Plane  sounds like a title that Don Simpson, at 4 in the morning, scrawled in white powder on a glass table, or perhaps a pitch by Entourage 's Ari Gold to his favorite client (''snakes on a plane — BOOM !''). It acknowledges, with a bluntness that passes for a wink, what the vast majority of Hollywood titles do not: that the movie it's adorning is a concept, nothing more, one that wears its brain-deadness on both lapels. That, of course, is just what everyone is getting excited about. For months, the anticipated trashiness of Snakes on a Plane  has been a marketing hook in the form of a universally shared in-joke, as the bloggy chatterers, in their very mockery, have made themselves part of the hype machine. Yet what, exactly, is the joke? If this cornball exploitation disaster movie had been called Anaconda 3: Flight of Fear  (or, as was once planned, Pacific Air 121 ), we could all stop pretending that there was something exotically tacky about it.
But enough highbrow critical analysis! Why are there motherf---in' snakes on this motherf---in' plane? Because Eddie (Byron Lawson), a gangster who preens like a Bruce Lee impersonator, has stashed dozens of the slithery, poisonous suckers aboard a double-decker red-eye flight from Honolulu to Los Angeles (they're stowed in the animal-cargo hold, in boxes that are triggered to open via computerized timer), all to keep Sean (Nathan Phillips), an FBI witness, from testifying against him. You know what you're in for as soon as the first toxic leatherneck slides down a hole in the lavatory, where a sexpot and her surfer boyfriend are working on their membership in the mile-high club. The snake hangs in the air, then opens its fangs and pounces, clomping down on the girl's naked breast. To call these folks victims would be overstating it. They are meat, like the pretty idiots who get terrorized by psychos in dried-skin masks. Their gruesome demise is just a gag, a momentary production number.
Is Snakes on a Plane  a cheesy fun bad movie or a bad movie, period? I'd say about half and half. The mostly digitized snakes curl through the airplane's bowels so readily that you quickly get used to them, and director David R. Ellis' idea of tension is to cut the lights in the cabin to a twilight murk and overdose us with shaky-cam as the plane is jostled by a thunderstorm, with its pilot dead of a heart attack. The snakes, a zoological Whitman's Sampler of rattlers, pythons, cobras, and exotic intercontinental species, are not shy. They'll chomp on anything that sticks out, from tongues to more, you know, sensitive appendages, but the violence grows a bit too baroque too early. I enjoyed seeing a rattler with half its body wriggling down some poor woman's eye socket, but after a handful of tasty attacks like these, the movie has nowhere to go. The giant boa constrictor, with its widening jaws, gets the best moments, and I wish it had more of them.
That chop-socky villain isn't the only relic from the '70s; so is everyone on the plane. The sexy flight attendant who comes on to the FBI witness with her coffee-tea-or-me smile (he's so boring that she must like him because he's in first class); the British snob businessman with hair plugs; the princess who totes a chihuahua named Mary-Kate in her designer handbag; the Diddy-lite hip-hop star with his What's Happening!!  posse; the leering co-pilot who's about as suave as Ron Burgundy; the flight attendant who's taking her final voyage before law school, played by token actress-you've-actually-heard-of Julianna Margulies — all deserve to be terrorized because they're such sketchy and forgettable Airport '06: A New Beginning  Jane and Johnny One-Notes. Next to this sorry crew, it's hardly a surprise that Samuel L. Jackson, as the FBI agent who's escorting the witness, looks like Superman. He starts out all calm and friendly, taking much longer than you expect to work his way up to steam-out-the-ears funky high dudgeon, and since he's the only one on screen with a spine, the audience greets his every action-movie directive (''We've got to put a barrier between us and the snakes!'') as if it were a holy command to hoot and holler.
I went to see Snakes on a Plane  at the 10 o'clock show on Thursday night, and the mood in the theater was a cross between what you'd expect to find at a Star Wars  sequel and a midnight show of Bedtime for Bonzo . Just about all the trailers — the new Denzel Washington thriller; the gonzo Beerfest  — were greeted with mild hisses. Mockery hung in the air. As Snakes  started, a few cheers went up, but the sneer never quite disappeared: It was applause as a form of one-upmanship — a desire for entertainment, yes, but also a celebration of the audience's superiority, its power over the movie. More potent than anything in Snakes on a Plane  is the fantasy offscreen: that if enough people talk up their desire to see this film and, at the same time, take an overt delight in what an unabashed piece of junk it is, they will fuse with the hype, with the movie's mystique. They will not just watch Snakes on a Plane ; they will own it.


Whatever it may be -- the worst candidate for an in-flight movie since "United 93," a fascinating case study on the power of Internet publicity, a chance for Samuel L. Jackson to kick some serious asp -- New Line's long-awaited "Snakes on a Plane" is at its best when it surrenders to the exuberant trashiness and matter-of-fact hilarity promised by its title. Though not always a first-class gas, "Plane" still managed to satiate a few bloggers and pop-culture fanatics on its way to a middling $15 million, less than expected given how much buzz it generated in the first place. Homevid mileage looks more promising.
Not since 1999's "The Blair Witch Project" has a horror film -- or any film, for that matter -- so unexpectedly slithered its way into the public's imagination thanks to a combination of online chatter, fan-made parodies and pre-release word of mouth.
Details of the project's lengthy gestation have long since seeped into movie lore: how Jackson agreed to do the picture based on its boldly ridiculous title; how New Line briefly switched the name to "Pacific Air 121" before wisely, if nervously, embracing the spirit of mockery that had erupted around this sight-unseen cult classic; how Jackson's most famous line, involving the key repetition of a 13-letter obscenity, came directly from the fans.
While it remains to be seen whether this level of audience involvement in the creative process will have any long-term ramifications for Hollywood, it can't be denied that all the attention has lent the final product a certain integrity. Rightfully released with an R rating instead of a PG-13 (helmer David R. Ellis shot extra footage after pic wrapped, upping the gore and nudity levels substantially), "Snakes on a Plane" is exactly the sort of tasteless, utterly depraved, no-nonsense sluts-and-guts extravaganza it was meant to be.
In a sunny, Hawaii-set prologue that temporarily distracts from the real matter at hand (namely, snakes on a plane), surfer dude Sean Jones (a bland Nathan Phillips) witnesses the brutal murder of a prosecutor by notorious gangster Eddie Kim (Byron Lawson). After a botched attempt on his life, Sean makes the tough decision to testify against Kim, with some urging and an offer of protection from tough FBI agent Neville Flynn (Jackson).
And so Sean and Flynn board a red-eye flight for Los Angeles, unaware that Kim's thugs have smuggled several crates full of venomous serpents into the cargo area. By the time the snakes make their first appearance around the 25-minute mark, however, pic has already introduced a handful of crew members and passengers: flight attendant Claire Miller (Julianna Margulies), ironically serving her last flight; lascivious co-pilot Rick (David Koechner); Mercedes (Rachel Blanchard), a blonde princess type who's never without her Chihuahua; uptight rap artist Three G's (Flex Alexander) and his portly wingmen (Kenan Thompson and Keith Dallas); and infant-toting mother Maria (Elsa Pataky).
With its forked tongue firmly in cheek, John Heffernan and Sebastian Gutierrez's serviceably nasty script satirizes the horrors of modern travel, while marking some passengers for certain death simply by introducing them -- don't get too attached to the foul-tempered businessman or the horny young couple, for starters.
Some time after takeoff, the snakes explode out of their crates and begin to wreak havoc, chewing through electric wiring, killing the captain (Tom Butler) and slithering their way under passengers' seats in coach. What follows is a tightly coiled and hiss-terically violent set piece that riffs cold-bloodedly on all the different places a snake can be hidden -- and, naturally, all the sensitive places a person can be bitten.
Visceral sequence, which goes on for quite some time, delivers all the eye-gougings, nipple-nibblings and cheesy snake's-eye vision one could possibly hope for, and will have fans in stitches from start to finish. It's jarring, then, when all this slapstick sadism is juxtaposed with scenes clearly intended to stir audience sympathy, such as when a little boy gets bitten by a cobra, causing his arm to graphically swell with pus.
From there, the surviving passengers retreat upstairs to the first-class cabin, where the remainder of their flight is jolted by occasional crises -- the air conditioner's broken! they're losing altitude! turbulence! more snakes! -- that don't exactly get the pulse racing. Tension and humor further dissipate as pic cuts away to the ground below, where Jackson's FBI colleague (Bobby Cannavale) and a snake expert (Todd Louiso) try to rally on the poison-control front. Concluding reels bring both plane and pic to a shaky landing.
Jackson, though clad in a leather jacket and conveying his usual air of badass authority, is relatively subdued as Flynn, as though determined not to let all the rampant silliness around him ruffle his dignity. (That doesn't stop him from having some fun with a Taser and a blowtorch.) Margulies, though feisty and appealing, has little to do in what is essentially a stripped-down version of the role Sandra Bullock played in "Speed."
Lensed in widescreen by Adam Greenberg, pic often suffers from the visual drabness that plagues so many airplane thrillers, as the dim lighting and cramped aisleways evoke the jet's claustrophobic environs at the expense of spatial coherence. The snakes themselves were brought to life via a deft combination of CGI and more than 400 live specimens, none of which, somewhat miraculously, were harmed during filming.
Sound design throughout comprises a lot of screaming and engine noise, with regular shock notes provided by Trevor Rabin's suitably menacing score. Closing credits are accompanied by the musicvideo for Cobra Starship's "Snakes on a Plane (Bring It)," one of the first and scarcely the least of the pic's numerous pop-song tributes.
