n intersibling death match reminiscent of Sam Shepard's "True West," the independent feature "Solitude" details the tortured, possibly incestuous relationship between Hilary (Mary Thornton), a dark, hyperactive young woman with grand ambitions, and her brother, Louis (Patrick Belton), a twitchy, bipolar idler who lives in a cramped Phoenix apartment filled with the moldering remains of recent takeout meals. Hilary turns up on Louis's doorstep with her new girlfriend, Soledad (Ronne Orenna), an amateur painter whom Hilary hopes to turn into the next big name in desert landscape art. Ostensibly, Hilary has come to ask her brother for the use of his car, so the two women can visit a potential dealer in Flagstaff. But Hilary's real motivations run much deeper and darker. The car is just an excuse to introduce the sweet, trusting Soledad to the bitterly sarcastic and fiercely destructive Louis, and set her up as a reluctant witness to the cruel psychological games the two siblings have been playing for most of their lives. "Are you sure you don't want a beer?" Louis asks Hilary as they warm up for the evening's entertainment. "Because you are going to need one." Written and directed by Susan Kraker and Pi Ware, "Solitude" has the claustrophobic feel of an Off Off Broadway storefront production, despite the sweeping desert landscape that frames the events. As Louis and Hilary slash away at each other, digging into a traumatic childhood dominated by a dismissive father and a depressive mother, they seem to merge into a single, angry mass. If they are not physically involved with each other (the film remains coy on that point), they are more emotionally intertwined than most married couples. The screaming matches make for some vivid theatrical moments, and Mr. Belton is particularly good at conveying Louis's manic ups and downs. He has one extended monologue, in which, with the help of a stuffed toy, he acts out the history of Louis's twisted relationship with his domineering father. The scene is very funny until Mr. Belton deftly allows it to spin out of control, his wit turning to bile and his polished delivery to screaming hysterics. Just what value "Solitude" has beyond such acting moments is debatable. The drama ultimately feels  like a clinical study without wider resonance.   Where Mr. Shepard's psychological slug-outs seem to reflect wider cultural issues, "Solitude" seems concerned  only  with  its own effects. "Solitude" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has vulgar language and some sensuality.

Low-budget indie production -- the feature debut of writers/directors Susan Kraker and Pi Ware (who married after the shoot) -- is a well-made but overly familiar entry in the manner of "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf." That is, a twisted family relationship is revealed to an outsider, with all the parties tearing into each other verbally. Critical support may create a cult following, but otherwise prospects for this claustrophobic drama seem dim.
Hilary (Mary Thornton) and her new friend (or, possibly, lover) Soledad (Ronne Orenna) are on their way to Flagstaff to show Soledad's art portfolio to a gallery owner. But they get waylaid in Phoenix, where Soledad finds herself the unwitting audience to -- and eventually participant in -- conflicts between Hilary and her crazy brother, Louis (Patrick Belton). The tension escalates to a supposed revelation -- the kind that's so overused it's utterly predictable. While not based on a stage play, pic feels like it is, as the characters confront each other in every possible combination. Despite good thesping, particularly from Belton, it's hard to imagine why anyone would want to spend time with this trio.
Camera (color), Marco Fargnoli; editor, Tom Sanders; music, Andrew Gross; production designers, Kraker, Ware; art director, Kraker. Reviewed at AFI Film Festival, L.A., Nov. 11, 2002. Running time: 105 MIN.
 

