
On its way to DVD, "Son of the Mask" takes a migraine-inducing, must-avoid detour to movie theaters. It bears no resemblance to the 10-year-old Jim Carrey movie that allegedly inspired it and reeks of a studio desperate to make an easy buck from the memory of one of its hits. The original, about an average Joe who turns into a devilish fiend after he finds a magic mask, has been transformed into a lobotomizing family film in which a kid-phobic man suddenly becomes the father of a possessed tot.
Alan Cumming -- apparently willing to appear in anything offering a terrible wardrobe and a paycheck -- plays Loki, the Norse god incarnated as someone who looks like he was on his way to goth night at ManRay and wound up here instead. He's come to Earth to fetch his mask, which wound up in the suburbs at the home of cartoonist Tim Avery (Jamie Kennedy). He's presumably named after Tex Avery, the creator of Daffy Duck, among others, but the movie is missing the wit of the average Looney Toon. (That should probably go without saying.) Instead, the emphasis on noise and pratfalls resembles a subpar episode of "Tom and Jerry" strung out on soda.
Whoever wears the mask is turned into a maniacal computer-generated effect bent on pranks and destruction. When Tim's wife (Traylor Howard, a perky sitcom veteran) leaves him alone with the baby, the predictable happens and all heck breaks loose. What follows is 90 minutes of flying grand pianos, green vomit, giant hand grenades, and photography that almost takes you into the actors' pores.
At its least intolerable, the movie is a fatherhood freak-out, but all its jokey observations are summed up with crotch kicks and projectile urine. Parents looking for a less harmful way to pass time with the kids are slightly safer at Gymboree.


         The 1994 comedy hit "The Mask," by no means a great film but certainly an entertaining one, possessed eye-popping visuals with a neon fruit salad palette and was one of the first features to exploit Jim Carrey's unique talents to full effect. One of the keys to director Chuck Russell's transformation of milquetoast bank clerk Stanley Ipkiss "from zero to hero," as the tagline went, was placing the wizardly special effects in service of Carrey's substantial physical gifts. The Industrial Light & Magic gadgetry became an extension of the rubber-faced actor, exaggerating and mimicking his expressions rather than overwhelming them.
 
  Disadvantaged at the outset by not having Jim Carrey, the film's wildly expensive sequel, "Son of the Mask," digs itself an impossibly deep hole by also forgoing a compelling story or introducing any characters of interest. Though the original "Mask" was based on the much bleaker Dark Horse comic book series and was clearly influenced by the kinetic energy of classic Looney Tunes animation, its offspring seems inspired only by the most vapid situation comedies and the least inventive offerings of Saturday morning cartoons, burying those who dare don the mask in a maelstrom of wasted special effects.
 


         






    The movie opens with the impish minor Norse god Loki (Alan Cumming) searching for the medieval wooden mask that allows the wearer to emulate his ability to shape-shift at will. Loki's father, Odin, is displeased that he has allowed the mask to fall into the hands of mortals and demands his son retrieve it. As Odin — a cross between Gimli the dwarf from "The Lord of the Rings" and the Minnesota Vikings mascot — Bob Hoskins looks as if he would rather be anywhere but in this movie.
 
  The nominal star is Jamie Kennedy, who plays aspiring cartoonist Tim Avery struggling to make his mark at an animation studio. Tim comes into contact with the mask when his dog, Otis, drags it home one day and Tim dons it as a makeshift Halloween costume. The mask transforms Tim into the hit of the company party, which also fast-tracks him at the office.
 
  It's not a knock on Kennedy to say he's no Carrey — who is? But when he pulls on the mask, he completely disappears, overwhelmed by a figure who resembles a green-skinned, orange-haired, hyperactive Bill Clinton belting out a truly annoying hip-hop rendition of "Can't Take My Eyes Off of You." Following the party and still grooving on his juiced-up, testosterone driven alter-ego, Tim returns home, sweeps his wife, Tonya (Traylor Howard), off her feet and nine months later they have a baby who is, indeed, the Son of the Mask.
 
  Alvey, or Double-A, as his father calls him, has the powers of Loki without needing the actual mask. The majority of the film revolves around Loki trying to get back his mask and Tim trying to deal with a newborn who literally bounces off the walls. The baby sequences are tedious, derivative of "Look Who's Talking," "Superbabies" and the creepy dancing baby on "Ally McBeal" — none of which were that amusing the first time around.
 
  It's astonishing how dull a movie that packs so much visual overstimulation into its frames can be. Writer Lance Khazei and director Lawrence Guterman ("Cats & Dogs") add nothing new, and the film's main claim may be for featuring the dry monotones of political speechwriter/author/game show host/cameo actor Ben Stein and comedian Steven Wright. Not recognizing this goldmine of drollness, the filmmakers didn't even have the sense to let them share a scene.
 
 'Son of the Mask'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG for action, crude and suggestive humor and language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Fascination with bodily fluids expelled with alarming force; cartoonish violence, at times bordering on domestic abuse.
 
 Jamie Kennedy
...Tim Avery
 
 Alan Cumming
...Loki
 
 Liam and Ryan Falconer
...Alvey
 
 Traylor Howard
...Tonya Avery
 
 Bob Hoskins
...Odin
 
 New Line Cinema presents a Radar Pictures production, in association with Dark Horse Entertainment, released by New Line. Director Lawrence Guterman. Producers Erica Huggins, Scott Kroopf. Executive producers Toby Emmerich, Kent Alterman, Michele Weiss. Screenplay by Lance Khazei. Director of photography Greg Gardiner. Editors Malcolm Campbell, Debra Neil Fisher. Costume designer Mary E. Vogt. Music Randy Edelman. Production designer Leslie Dilley. Supervising art directors Michelle McGahey, Bill Booth. Set decorator Rebecca Cohen. Running time: 1 hour, 35 minutes. In general release.   

Jim Carrey wasn't quite a star when he made The Mask  (1994), yet from the moment that he submitted to the movie's spell, which turned him into a zoot-suited, green-faced big-daddy love machine, the real magic was Carrey's hothouse id. He was joyful enough to dominate the special effects instead of the other way around. The genial Jamie Kennedy shows no such power in Son of the Mask . He plays a nebbish who gets turned by the mask into what might be a shellac-haired, deeply untame version of Brian Williams, complete with glorified Vanilla Ice dance moves.
Somebody stop him! Since Kennedy's flatly ironic white-boy gyrations aren't enough to carry the movie, everyone in sight gets a shot at masked transformation. Kennedy's dog becomes a canine Tasmanian Devil, and his infant son, conceived during Dad's masked night out (the baby does a disco cha-cha to ''Le Freak'' while still in the womb), proves to have such powers as the ability to morph into Woody Woodpecker. The characters twirl around like mini tornadoes, but between random brash moments of technological eye-tickling, Son of the Mask  sags more than it spins.

im Carrey's 1994 vehicle "The Mask" should demand a paternity test to divest itself once and for all of any responsibility for this mutant spawn. Where "The Mask" was a thinly drawn bank-heist comedy saved by Mr. Carrey's antic gifts, "Son of the Mask" is an irredeemable mess, a computer-animated Punch and Judy show without wit, heart or a single memorable performance. Tim Avery (Jamie Kennedy) is a would-be cartoonist and full-time schlemiel, stuck in a low-level job at a cutting-edge animation company. When his wife, Tonya (Traylor Howard), begins to pester him about starting a family, Tim regresses into an evasive man-child, nuzzling and baby-talking with his beloved mutt, Otis. One evening, preparing for his office Halloween party, Tim chances upon a wooden mask that Otis has dragged home. As viewers of the original "Mask" will know, this artifact is the property of Loki, the Norse god of mischief (here played by Alan Cumming). Whoever dons it immediately becomes a computer-animated whirlwind of obnoxious egotism and untrammeled desire (a transformation that in both "Mask" films is mysteriously regarded as a welcome path to self-actualization). In short order, Tim is promoted at the company and impregnates his wife. But alas, their son, Alvey, is "born of the Mask" - he's a semi-digitized superbaby, capable of shape-shifting, tap-dancing and feats of superhuman strength. When Alvey's mother leaves on a business trip and Loki decides to come back for his mask, poor Tim, and the even poorer audience, are in for a roller-coaster ride of manic chase scenes and computer-assisted mayhem. Mr. Kennedy should have listened to W. C. Fields's dictum about never performing with dogs or small children - his amiable blandness is no match for the cartoonish aggression of Alvey and Otis, who are soon engaged in a Tom and Jerry-style rivalry, chasing each other around the Avery house with mallets and grenades. The effects, while stunningly realized, are a depressing contribution to a style of computer animation that seems almost deliberately ugly. One begins to anticipate with dread the scenes in which the flesh-and-blood baby, played by the twins Ryan and Liam Falconer, morphs into a creepy digital version of himself. The computer-animated Otis, a greenish, drooling dog with glistening fangs, may scare some of the small children it was designed to please. But youngsters will suffer no lasting harm from this frantic, grating spectacle. Their less resilient parents may not be so lucky. "Son of the Mask" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has a suggestion of off-screen sex, a sanitized depiction of childbirth and  sight gags involving bodily fluids.

The birth of this decade-later sequel would be easier to dismiss for the manic and mindless exercise that it is if the movie didn't represent a significant technical endeavor, replete with splashy special effects. The net result is a truly numbing experience, inexplicably aimed at those who were zygotes when Jim Carrey's energy powered its ostensible father to box office success. Almost surely destined for a brief stopover in theaters before a playdate with DVD, this misbegotten offspring features TV prankster Jamie Kennedy in a leading role, though in this case, the not-so-funny joke's on him.
As with the original, "Son of the Mask" is positioned as a live-action cartoon, yet whatever Warner Bros.-inspired lunacy motivated the first plays here like taking Joe Dante's cinematic tributes to those classic shorts and injecting them with steroids.
No one really escapes unscathed, but there are probably enough bodily fluid and crotch-kick gags to garner laughs from younger tykes before even their
 patience wears thin. The only problem is that after an opening sequence detailing Norse mythology -- and how the mask of god of mischief Loki (Alan Cumming) conveys astounding powers on its wearer -- it's hard to imagine discriminating parents wanting their kids to partake.
There is even something slightly unsavory about the basic premise, in which a childlike wannabe animator, Tim (Kennedy), is horrified by the prospect of having a baby, only to don the mask and impregnate his ridiculously tolerant wife (Traylor Howard).
The product of that union is a strange-looking baby possessing masklike powers, which he manifests after watching the famous Warner Bros. cartoon "One Froggy Evening," which is undoubtedly the best 90 seconds in the movie.
Loki, meanwhile, scours the world searching for the mask, while godly father Odin (Bob Hoskins, hidden under pretty impressive makeup) threatens to strip him of his powers if he doesn't retrieve it, leading to an inevitable (if painfully prolonged) showdown.
Director Lawrence Guterman ("Cats & Dogs") and first-time writer Lance Khazei load up on scatological gags and references, which is peculiar, since the Nickelodeon-watching target audience is unlikely to yuk it up over allusions to "The Exorcist" and spaghetti Westerns.
Although his WB network hidden-camera show "The Jamie Kennedy Experiment" actually had its moments, Kennedy plays Tim (whose last name is clearly an homage to animator Tex Avery) in such a cloying, juvenile manner -- in essence, think of an adult speaking baby talk -- that it's painful to endure.
The best moments actually belong to the dog, Otis (Bear), at least before he inevitably dons the mask and ends up looking like a poor man's Tasmanian Devil.
Those effects are generally quite polished, including some of the original animation, but even the design feels hopelessly derivative -- as do the various permutations of the dancing and talking tot. Although such kid-driven gimmickry is usually crowdpleasing, potential laughs get lost amid the mayhem, and some of the mask-powered baby's behavior simply comes across as creepy.
Perhaps the movie's strangest aspect, however, is that amid the silliness it manages to be preachy, from touting the joys of parenthood to the mom's warning that planting the kid in front of the TV is "gonna make him stupid."
Sure, blame TV. As excuses go, that explanation might be as good as any.

A nutso look into brotherly love blurring into boyband buggery, Harry and Max  plays like an episode of Behind the Music  as scripted by Dennis Cooper . Harry (Bryce Johnson ), a 23-year-old booze-swilling, fading teen idol, goes camping with his beloved younger sibling, tender high schooler Max (Cole Williams ), whose own burgeoning recording career has landed him an in-depth Q&A in Teeny Bopper  magazine. Johnson, who bears a passing resemblance to Jordan Knight  of New Kids on the Block , and Williams, who looks like the littlest Hanson brother, preen and pout like Tiger Beat  pinups. The boys speak of hurt feelings of the past and the trouble with Mom and Dad, making Suddenly, Last Summer -like references to a family vacation in Bermuda . Fraternal closeness morphs into Max orally pleasuring Harry. Mmmbop.
The rest of Harry and Max 's slim 74 minutes is a swirl of messy boundaries and loony dialogue. "We're not fucking. We're helping each other work things out," protests Harry to the charges of incest by his mortified ex-girlfriend Nikki (Rain Phoenix ), who's fresh from getting it on with Max. The family romance wears thin; the emotional lives of the leads are as vacuous as a Joey Fatone  B side. Director Christopher Munch  explored the homophilic leanings of pop stars far more successfully in his first film, The Hours and Times  (1991), a smart, graceful imagining of a sex-charged night between Brian Epstein  and John Lennon  in a Barcelona  hotel. That movie was made for adults; his latest offering is a taboo-busting pilot for the WB audience.
