 If we are to believe "Sorry, Haters," the worst threat facing the United States today is not Islamic extremists but lonely young women with low self-esteem. While this may not be news to a generation raised on "Oprah," the movie pushes its thesis so far beyond the bounds of sanity that you have to wonder if the director, Jeff Stanzler, is entirely serious.  Shamelessly drawing on post-Sept. 11 anxieties, the movie follows a New York City cab driver named Ashade (the Tunisian actor and director Abdellatif Kechiche), a Syrian Muslim whose brother is imprisoned at Guantánamo. When he's flagged down by Phoebe (Robin Wright Penn), who appears to be stalking her former husband and his new wife, Ashade is willing to overlook her mildly eccentric behavior and accepts her offer of legal help for his brother. But when Ashade's sister-in-law is suddenly arrested by the police, he discovers that Phoebe's erratic personality is more dangerous than he could ever have imagined.  Despite the impressive commitment of the two leads, whose barbed interaction lends a dark magic to the film's early scenes, "Sorry, Haters" unfolds with such utter looniness that the horrible final moments are more likely to inspire laughter than shock. Casually insulting our emotions and intelligence, Mr. Stanzler seems to have shaped his film with one goal in mind: to prove that audacity and recklessness are acceptable substitutes for craft and common sense. Needless to say, they're not.

Lover Other: The Story of Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore

A head-scratcher supreme -- not least for pondering what possibly attracted Robin Wright Penn to her intractable, impossible role -- Jeff Stanzler's "Sorry,Haters" is sorry indeed. Most charitably read as a confused response to post-9/11 cultural clashes and emotions, pic strains for profundity as it pits a self-loathing American musicvid channel employee against a Syrian emigre cabbie for a strange and pointless round of mind games. Commercially challenged in the extreme, this one is sure to divide the room at fests.
Immediately suspicious for her unaccountably intense interest in the plight of the brother of her taxi driver Ashade (Abdellatif Kechiche, helmer of "L'Esquive"), Phoebe (Penn) demands to be taken to a suburban New Jersey home where she engages in vandalism. Evidently off her rocker, Phoebe toys with Ashade past the point of viewer patience, rendering climactic revelations impotent. Penn looks bewildered in a role that simply doesn't track, but Kechiche rises to the occasion. Stanzler's helming, shot blandly in digital vid, amounts to point-and-shoot.
 Camera (color, DV), Mauricio Rubinstein; editors, Annette Davey, Susan Graef; music, Raz Mesinai; music supervisor, Mark Wike; production designer, Ethan Tobman; costume designer, Randy Gardell. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Discovery), Sept. 11, 2004. (Also in AFI Los Angeles Film Festival.) English, Arabic, French dialogue . Running time: 86 MIN.
 


 
 


 

Post–9-11 issues we're still working through in our pop culture: horror, trauma, phobic dread, vengeful rage, xenophobia, war-zone nostalgia, survivor guilt, socioeconomic guilt, name-your-own guilt, blah blah blah. Fictionalizations of The Day and its local fallout have indeed felt like a year of therapy sessions reduced to their forgive-and-heal-thyself pan gravy. Jeff Stanzler 's Sorry, Haters  avoids the obvious/preachy easily enough; his New Yorkers have already had those  conversations, and his scenario eventually hinges on what we didn't  share five Septembers ago. The opening overture is just typical enough to get our jaws twitching for a yawn: Mournful Syrian cabdriver Ashade (France-based actor- filmmaker Abdellatif Kechiche) crosses paths with hard-charging career woman Philly (Robin Wright Penn ), who is apparently in the throes of a post–custody battle nervous breakdown. She offers legal help to Ashade, whose brother has been renditioned back to Syria , but the worm turns sometime after that, when she suggests the two of them "do some damage." "I don't know anything about munitions . . . ?" she says, and Stanzler's modest head-scratcher abandons all claims on the two-lost-souls melodrama.
With a sour twist of character—specifically, a single close-up of Penn's hair-trigger power maven looking over a roof edge— Sorry, Haters  acquires the slowly widening, fanged grin of a Polanski tale. (The out-of-tune title is a better fit for Philly's hit youth-channel show, in which wealthy pop stars like Fred Durst  boast about their bling.) What seems distastefully misjudged early on becomes part of a lurking pathology. The dirt-cheap DV vibe never becomes expressive, but it does rhyme with the all-bets-off riskiness of the characters. (Like Bubble , Stanzler's movie is being released simultaneously via video- on-demand.) The script, no more or less hobbled by contrivance than your average indie, certainly has a personality of its own, but it's all about the performances. Kechiche is reserved and superbly troubled, but Wright Penn, her stardom- crippling reserves of bitterness and bile rising to the surface, is a scary monster in full bloom, and her habitation of this wacky role makes the movie worth its weight in pixels.
