
Regardless of where one stands on the debate over human origins, both sides 
should be able to agree that the new evolution movie, ''A Sound of Thunder," is a work of unintelligent design. Set in a future that allows man to travel back 65 million years via time machine, the movie fails to conjure the wonder of the Ray Bradbury short story that inspired it.
Instead, we get a frequently shirtless, often anesthetizing Edward Burns as a hunter who leads the retro tours. Burns's character is also a scientist, and he conducts these trips for a company called Time Safari in the hope of doing something, uh, more scientific with the technology. Time travelers are there merely to hunt the designated prehistoric target and then turn around and trudge back through a wormhole.
One of the rules at Time Safari is that guests can't touch anything on the trip. They can't remove anything or leave anything behind, either. Naturally, someone does, and tidal ''time waves" that wash over Chicago are provoked. Now the entire city looks like the set of a Sid and Marty Krofft production. There are deadly vines and gangs of man-eating half-baboon, half-dinosaur creatures that seem to have waltzed out of ''Land of the Lost."
They give much better performances than the noncomputer-generated cast, which never seems to be anywhere near the creatures in the first place. The weaponry, meanwhile, consists of chunky gray guns that shoot nitroglycerin. Somewhere in the 25th century Buck Rogers is missing them.
The budget for this picture is allegedly tens of millions of dollars, but the film looks like it was paid for with petty cash. These are among the least convincing special effects I've ever seen.
The obvious fakery robs the movie of a sense of disaster or panic. Ben Kingsley, as the weasel running Time Safari, contributes a load of camp. Dressed in a white wig and playing a sissy, he's embarrassing, too, having accepted a part clearly intended for Malcolm McDowell.
The makers of ''A Sound of Thunder" seem only vaguely aware of their source material and its cautionary tenor. Published in 1954 and collected in ''R Is for Rocket," the tale eerily wondered about dictatorship, godlessness, and ecology, and inadvertently introduced the principle of the butterfly effect -- in 18 pages! Here, Bradbury's story is stepped on like a sheet of toilet paper stuck to the sole of a shoe.
The adaptation by Gregory Poirier, Joshua Oppenheimer, and Thomas Dean Donnelly is an execrable misapprehension. It invents corny creatures, dumb dialogue, and action sequences that the director, Peter Hyams, has no idea what to do with. Hyams is a veteran who's made ''2010," ''End of Days," and a couple Jean-Claude Van Damme movies. He has a career no bomb can stop, although this latest picture feels like one he might have made decades ago.
Which raises an interesting evolutionary question. Is a bad movie now as bad as one 20 years ago, or does badness change over time? Perhaps. But in this case, it doesn't matter. This movie is a caveman, and I doubt evolution will affect that.


         Director-cinematographer Peter Hyams' ambitious but majorly disappointing "A Sound of Thunder" suggests two things: One, that a large-scale sci-fi disaster movie must have state-of-the-art special effects to have a prayer of succeeding; Two, even if an enormous budget were available for the most spectacular effects imaginable, the timelier-than-ever Ray Bradbury short story upon which this movie is based might well have been brought to the screen far more persuasively in animation instead of live action. Indeed, it's possible to imagine "A Sound of Thunder" as a knockout Japanese animé.
 
  The film in turn demonstrates two hard truths: First, that despite all the experience, dedication and energy of Hyams and a team of Hollywood experts, the Czech Republic's venerable Barrandov Studios, source of many a Czech film classic, is not up to creating world-class special effects, even though the picture was long in post-production. Second, that for all his accomplishments, Ben Kingsley can be an insufferable, over-the-top ham without strong material and firm direction.
 


         






    It's 2055, and Kingsley's Charles Hatton is the superrich proprietor of Chicago's Time Safari company, which for an exorbitant fee, offers a time-travel hunting expedition back 65 million years when dinosaurs ruled the Earth. Leading the expeditions is Dr. Travis Ryer (Edward Burns), who believes that time travel will allow him to secure DNA to revive long-extinct species. (It also seems that sometime in the next half-century a virus will wipe out virtually all wild animals not in captivity.) Apparently, Ryer's responsibilities during the expeditions and his idealistic scientific passions so occupy his attention that he somehow manages to overlook what a ruthless huckster and greedy jerk Hatton is.
 
  Hatton has managed to steal the technology developed by physicist Dr. Sonia Rand (Catherine McCormack) that makes the time travel possible, and she tries to sound the alarm that under Hatton's control the technology could inadvertently trigger evolutionary catastrophe. The rules of the safaris into the prehistoric age are: Don't change anything in the past, don't leave anything behind; and above all, don't bring anything back, because any of these things could mess up the existing course of evolution in unimaginable ways.
 
  When a tiny object has been brought from a safari this triggers a series of "time waves," which wash over Chicago, re-creating evolution with increasing speed as each wave crashes. In short, Chicago overnight becomes a tropical jungle inhabited by dinosaurs, giant bats and the like. What's there to do but for Ryer and Reed to join forces to locate the foreign object and travel back in time to set evolution back on its course?
 
  Virtually nothing in "A Sound of Thunder" is convincing, although Burns and McCormack deserve credit for their determined staunchness. The picture looks as murky as its story line, the sound is tinny, much of the dialogue is flat or confoundingly technical or merely risible, and most everything on the screen looks patently fake.   

 "A Sound of Thunder," by Ray Bradbury, is a short, elegant science-fiction parable about the dangers of going back in time and messing up the course of evolution.  "A Sound of Thunder," a scrap of late-summer damaged goods from Warner Brothers ostensibly based on Mr. Bradbury's tale, offers a somewhat different lesson. Directed by Peter Hyams from a script credited to (or perhaps blamed on) Gregory Poirier,  Thomas Dean Donnelly and Joshua Oppenheimer, it illustrates the dangers of turning a lean, elegant short story into a loud, noisy, incoherent B movie.  Slogging through a future Chicago overgrown with killer vines and menaced by ape-lizards, a character is heard to remark, "This can't be good." No, it can't. But there are many ways a movie can fail to be good, and "A Sound of Thunder" is, at least, not a dull, mediocre genre exercise. (If you want one of those, please help yourself to "Underclassman," also opening today.) Instead, this picture achieves a level of badness that is its own form of sublimity. You almost - please note that I said almost - have to see it to believe it.  Mediocre movies suffer from a deficit of imagination. Truly bad ones, in contrast, are afflicted by imagination run amok, unchecked by formal discipline or competence. Those ape-lizards, especially when they start to fly, are impressive in their way, as is the sheer volume of exposition that has been stuffed into Mr. Bradbury's tidy conceit.  In 2055, we learn, time travel ("an invention that could change the world or destroy it") has been commodified by a greedy mogul named Charles Hatton (Ben Kingsley). Hatton runs a business called Time Safari, which ferries tourists  back into the Cretaceous period to hunt dinosaurs. Someone has also apparently gone back to the 20th century to retrieve a truckload of double-breasted chalk-stripe suits and, to judge from Mr. Kingsley's white pompadour, Jack Valenti's hair.  Hatton is harassed by government regulators and also by Sonia Rand (Catherine McCormack), an angry blond scientist who disrupts one of his soirees with a Champagne bottle filled with blood. "A hundred years ago she'd be protesting the Internet or biotechnology," Hatton remarks, recalling the notorious anti-e-mail riots that roiled the Eisenhower administration.  Actually, Dr. Rand is trying to warn the world of the dangers of time travel, which become apparent after a prehistoric hunting trip goes awry. Leading a squad of scientists through the chaos and confusion that ensues is Edward Burns, who brings his usual dim stoicism to the role of Dr. Travis Ryer, a studly biologist.  The fake science in science fiction works best when sparingly applied, but "A Sound of Thunder" pours it on in buckets, making the story as murky as the cut-rate special effects. There is a talking computer, a holographic lion (all the real ones have been wiped out by some kind of virus) and lots of fast talk about time waves, wormholes and bio-filters.  Chicago, meanwhile, is overrun by murderous vines, giant insects and predatory dino-orangutan-bats. It also has an underground train system locals call "the subway," and a National League baseball team that has won the World Series twice. That may be pushing the limits of plausibility a little too far.  "A Sound of Thunder" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some strong language, violence, a hint of sexuality and vicious flying ape-lizards.

Every bit as bad as advance buzz has indicated, Peter Hyams' long-delayed "A Sound of Thunder" finally arrives in megaplexes just in time to provide an appropriately downbeat end to a disappointing summer season. It's a clunky and cheesy disaster that doubtless will fast-forward to bargain bins at homevid outlets.
Loosely based on a story by Ray Bradbury -- very, very loosely, no doubt - pic is cautionary yarn about the dangers of time travel. In 2055 Chicago, Time Safari, Inc., uses cutting-edge technology to zap wealthy customers back to the Cretaceous Era for the chance to hunt dinosaurs. Everything is supposed to be rigidly controlled - just like at "Westworld," right? -- to ensure nothing that occurs during a blast to the past can alter the flow of history and evolution.
But, of course, something terrible happens - specifically, someone inadvertently stomps on a butterfly -- and that in turn triggers a series of "time waves" that threaten to revert the 21st-century planet to a prehistoric state.
As primordial plant life overruns the Windy City, and bizarrely evolved predators (one part primate, one part reptile, all parts nasty) prey on bit players and co-stars, Dr. Travis Ryer (Edward Burns), the studly scientist who leads the Time Safari treks, and Dr. Sonia Rand (Catherine McCormack), inventor of the time-travel technology, struggle to reverse the reverting process.
It's conceivable that "Thunder" might have been more impressive with an upgrade in its production values. (The chintzy special effects often make it appear the actors have been dropped into the middle of a video game.) But all the high-tech gloss in the world wouldn't smooth Hyams' bumpy pacing - by turns desperately frenetic and yawningly plodding - or untangle the sometimes torturously muddled storyline.
There are definite signs of last-minute cutting, re-cutting and re-re-cutting. And there is every indication that most of the cast didn't feel "Thunder" was worth the expenditure of excessive effort. Ben Kingsley has a few choice moments as Time Safari CEO Charles Hatton, a glad-handing greedhead who undermines safety precautions. Unfortunately, he's forced to wear an outrageous wig that makes it appear he has a massive White Persian cat perched atop his head.
There's probably an interesting doc (or docudrama) to be made about the making of "A Sound of Thunder." Pic was buffeted by mishaps like massive flooding during location filming in the Czech Republic, and the subsequent (albeit not directly related) bankruptcy of Franchise Pictures. Surely, this drama behind the drama would be far more entertaining than what actually appears on screen.

The more things change, the more they stay the same—A Sound of Thunder  begins 50 years from now, when having finally conquered the fourth dimension, humanity is ready to get down to the truly serious business: exploiting the epochal discovery for a quick buck. Enter Time Safari Inc. , a travel agency specializing in carefully controlled dinosaur-hunting expeditions for high rollers. Lured by the promise of research funding, Dr. Travis Ryer  (Edward Burns ) puts up with rich-fool clients and a craven boss (a delightfully hammy Ben Kingsley ); it's the type of work-place where colleagues justify their fuck-ups by appealing to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Before long, the inevitable happens: One would-be dino slayer inadvertently squashes a butterfly instead, setting off a chain reaction of cosmic proportions.
Using Ray Bradbury 's 1952 story as a jumping-off point, A Sound of Thunder deals with the narrative troubles endemic to time travel movies by positing a scenario in which the altered past ripples through the future in waves, allowing Ryer and fellow scientist Sonia Rand  (Catherine McCormack ) a brief window to set things right before their own species is wiped out. Harder to explain away are the shaky CGI effects—the actors appear to have been clumsily blue-screened into the unconvincing visualization of mid-21st-century Chicago  (a glance at the walls of Ryer's apartment confirms the movie's sci-fi status by revealing that the Cubs have won not one, but two World Series in the interim). Still, the movie recovers from a sluggish opening act to pack some real suspense in its second half, set in a literal urban jungle populated by giant bats, piranha-faced eels, and—in a harrowing scene—a pack of carnivorous primate-reptile mutants. Consistent with the spirit (if not the craftsmanship) of Bradbury's cautionary fable, A Sound of Thunder can be read as a timely warning about climate change, but here in Mesozoic America, the movie's most political aspect may be its quaint respect for the basic principles of evolution.
