The Squid and the Whale  may require explanation as a title — it refers to a famous permanent exhibit at New York's American Museum of Natural History depicting warring sea creatures, the monstrous scale of which can singe a kid's memory for life — but the metaphor is clear. In Noah Baumbach's caustically funny, awfully sad, pitilessly autobiographical coming-of-age story, the narcissistic parents, Bernard (Jeff Daniels) and Joan (Laura Linney), who ensnare their two sons in the bitterness of a dissolving marriage loom large and intractable as monsters themselves.
They are also specimens of New York City intelligentsia circa 1986, rarefied types who live in a Brooklyn brownstone, compete as writers (Joan's career is on the up, Bernard's isn't), and take their sons to tennis lessons, which only adds to the saltiness the filmmaker sprinkles on his own wounds. Locating himself in the older-brother character (played by Roger Dodger 's excellent Jesse Eisenberg) who, in his teenage unhappiness, mimics his father's pomposity and blames his unfaithful mother, Baumbach lets no one off the hook, least of all himself.
The movie doesn't so much go someplace dramatically as hang suspended, like the museum exhibit itself, and the abrupt nonconclusion is jarring. (The coda: And then I became a filmmaker.) But in hovering, The Squid and the Whale  becomes its own realistic display of family entropy, as cautionary as it is educational.
2006 Oscar Nomination:  Best Original Screenplay (Noah Baumbach)

 One of the ruling assumptions of American popular culture - or at least of American independent movies - is that everyone's adolescence is uniquely miserable. Coming of age, with its attendant thrills and traumas (generally summarized under the headings school, sex and parents), is an inexhaustible subject because no two people go through it in exactly the same way. Once we're safely afloat in adulthood, though, we can begin to recognize the universality of our earlier experiences, and we can be grateful when, amid all the prurience and sentimentality that attend representations of adolescence, someone manages to get it right.  This is what Noah Baumbach has done in "The Squid and the Whale," his fourth feature as a director (after "Kicking and Screaming,"  "Highball" and "Mr. Jealousy") and a superior example of a familiar genre. Or as one of the film's characters might put it, the "filet" of Sundance-beloved troubled-teen cinema. Told largely from the point of view of Walt Berkman (Jesse Eisenberg), a 16-year-old enduring the breakup of his parents' marriage in mid-1980's Park Slope, Brooklyn, "The Squid and the Whale" is both sharply comical and piercingly sad. Mr. Baumbach surveys the members of the flawed, collapsing Berkman family with sympathy but without mercy, noting their individual and collective failures and imperfections with relentless precision.  "Mom and me versus you and Dad." Those words, spoken by Walt's younger brother, Frank (Owen Kline), on a tennis court, are the first we hear, and they set the stage for what is to follow. After they split, the boys' parents, Bernard and Joan, work out a complicated, obsessively equitable joint-custody arrangement (it even covers the cat), but they can hardly prevent the boys from choosing sides. Frank is more comfortable with Joan (Laura Linney), whose infidelities appear to have precipitated the separation, while Walt is his father's angry partisan, as well as his devoted acolyte.  Bernard (Jeff Daniels), a novelist and creative writing teacher whose career has faltered, is a fountain of pompous judgments - the kind of man who can refer to Franz Kafka as "one of my predecessors" and dismiss "A Tale of Two Cities" as "minor Dickens" - which his older son has a habit of parroting. The film's narrative, a swift-moving series of short, pointed vignettes, traces the decay of Walt's view of Bernard, from worship to protectiveness to disillusionment. At the same time, Walt's initial fury at Joan softens, and by the end you have the feeling that he will eventually be able to accept his parents for who they are, a difficult and necessary accomplishment of maturity.  Not that Mr. Baumbach, whose own Park Slope childhood lies a film-strip's breadth beneath the surface of this picture, wraps everything up neatly. Family life, under the best of circumstances, is messy, and for all their sophistication and good taste, the Berkmans are an unruly and contentious bunch. Joan's fledgling literary efforts turn out to be quite successful, and at times she and Bernard appear to be enacting a Brooklyn-bohemian remake of "A Star Is Born."  That they are both writers is hardly incidental. Intellectual pride and creative ambition are woven into the family's identity. Bernard worries that Frank, who is 12 and who admires his oafish tennis instructor, Ivan (Billy Baldwin), is not sufficiently serious, while Walt, desperate for acknowledgment as an artist, passes off Pink Floyd's "Hey You" as his own composition at a school talent show. He also mimics Bernard's hypercritical, contemptuous manner with his sweet-natured girlfriend, Sophie (Halley Feiffer), whom he may also be punishing for Joan's transgressions.  There is more, including Frank's horrifyingly funny sexual awakening, Walt and Bernard's infatuation with one of Bernard's students (Anna Paquin, who played Mr. Daniels's daughter in Carroll Ballard's "Fly Away Home"), and Joan's affair with Ivan. All of it is handled with a slightly breathless intelligence. Neither the camera nor the actors ever stop moving, as though Mr. Baumbach, in addition to depicting Walt's desperate impatience, were also drawing on it as a stylistic and emotional resource.  His writing respects the prickly individuality of the characters - in particular the adults, who fall into habits of speech that seem like self-conscious tics to everyone but them. (Joan calls her boys Chicken and Pickle; Bernard is overly fond of that filet metaphor.) Ms. Linney is, as ever, charming and a little elusive, which fits Joan's defensive reserve. Much as she adores her sons, Joan pulls away from them a bit to assert her independence from Bernard, whose needy narcissism has clearly worn out her patience. As well it might - and yet Mr. Daniels, while clearly delineating Bernard's self-deluding vanity, makes him neither a monster nor a clown. He is, almost in spite of himself, a man of feeling, not above appealing to the pity of those he loves when he can no longer impress or intimidate them.  "The Squid and the Whale" is hard on him, but it does not let anyone else, young or old, off the hook. Its portrayal of a particular slice of the New York middle class at a recent moment in history is precise, but such accuracy is not the point of the exercise. The film's tableau of domestic absurdity is likely to tickle,  and also to lacerate,  anyone who has either raised a child or been one. The last scenes strike a clean, discordant note of devastating optimism: you have a feeling that Walt will be just fine, which is to say that he will grow to be just as screwed up as his parents, but in his own unique way.  "The Squid and the Whale" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Adults must be protected from the uncomfortable insights it may offer their children - especially those between ages 13 and 16 - into the nature of parenthood.
The literary craze for tell-all family memoir gets a unique twist in Noah Baumbach 's The Squid and the Whale, a film à clef that satirically dramatizes the disintegration of his parents' marriage.
Tender, cruel, and very funny, Baumbach's fourth feature turns family history into a sort of urban myth. Although the Berkmans of mid-1980s Park Slope  lack the quirky grandeur of the Glass family or the Royal Tenenbaums, they wander even more myopically in the land of literary metaphor. Tennis functions as a metonym for relationships; the search for a parking space is a free-floating trope. As the eldest Berkman son poignantly brags, both his parents have Ph.D.'s in literature.
Books embody love. Thus, when Mom (a naturalistically unglamorous Laura Linney ) and college professor Dad (a brilliantly unrecognizable Jeff Daniels ) break the news that they are breaking up, 16-year-old Walt (Jesse Eisenberg , the avid nephew in Roger Dodger  ) blames Mom. The son's respect for his intellectually overbearing father is both heartbreaking and hilarious; given his sense of the world, Walt assumes that Mom ditched Dad because his recent "experimental" novels have been commercial flops. Younger brother Frank (Owen Kline ) is still a kid and identified with Mom—an altogether more mysterious and less attitudinizing force.
Dad moves into a dump on the far side of Prospect Park , taking his sons on alternate nights. He's a shamelessly self-pitying, grotesquely competitive, pompous cheapskate—but, as expansively played by Daniels, his comic flaws are complicated by an inherent decency and dogged insistence on artistic seriousness. Dad is the hapless idealist; Mom, who pretty much does whatever she wants, is the tough realist. Events grow increasingly complicated once she publishes a story in The New Yorker  and takes up with an affable tennis pro (William Baldwin ), while Dad's most provocative student (Anna Paquin ) moves into his spare room.
Baumbach's unwieldy title alludes to a diorama, known as "The Clash of the Titans," that has left its impression on the minds of many a young visitor to the Museum of Natural History. But less than the war between the Berkmans—which, paradoxically, now seems to inform Baumbach's earlier films Kicking and Screaming  (1995) and Mr. Jealousy  (1998)—the movie's real struggle is between father and son. Having inherited Dad's self-importance (Kafka identified as "one of my predecessors"), Walt dutifully sits in on his father's college writing seminars and faithfully parrots his literary opinions, at one point attempting to impress a classmate by characterizing The Metamorphosis , which he has never read, as "very Kafkaesque."
The precocious Kicking and Screaming  remains a notable evocation of postgraduate angst; the less successful Mr. Jealousy  is a fascinating analysis of male masochism. Like those, The Squid and the Whale  is filled with throwaway, hyper-verbal pyrotechnics, but it's visually wittier and less cute—not least in its mortifying view of adolescent sex. This comedy of humiliation has strong elements of psychodrama and even exorcism. Baumbach gave his actual father a cameo as his alter ego's writing teacher in Kicking and Screaming ; here the filmmaker casts himself as his fictional father's old student. Indeed. Dad departs The Squid and the Whale  in a richly novelistic climax: The long-simmering parking crisis boils over in a farcical turn of events whose emotional complexity may be gauged by competing readings of Breathless.
Full disclosure: If I hadn't liked The Squid and the Whale  so much, I might have begged off reviewing. For, while I have only the slightest personal acquaintance with the filmmaker, I do know his brother, his father, and particularly, his mother, former Voice movie critic Georgia Brown. From this privileged position, the movie is, of course, additionally fascinating—albeit not so much for what the filmmaker reveals about his family but how he chooses to represent them.
Janet Malcolm  opened her infamous screed The Journalist and the Murderer  by observing that "every journalist who is not too stupid or too full of himself to notice what is going on knows that what he does is morally indefensible." But isn't this true of any writer who takes people's lives as grist for her mill? I don't necessarily recognize Baumbach's actual family in The Squid and the Whale  but I do recognize the artist's ruthlessness—and the degree to which he's been true to their aesthetic family values.
