Missed out on the first State Property? Don't sweat it. You need only have been alive and marginally aware of gangsta rap music during the last 10 years or so to suss out this sequel's themes. State Property 2  is no more three-dimensional than your average brand-name-laden hip-hop video.
The film follows a reprehensible porcupine of a man named Beans, who's doing hard time for drug trafficking. (How's this for cinema verityé: Beans is played by rapper Beanie Sigel, who will miss this movie's premiere party, thanks to a federal weapons conviction.) We know Beans is the protagonist not because Property  opens with his narration (everybody gets a voice-over in this cartoonish ego-fest) and not because he's legally challenged (everyone here is epically guilty and remorse-free). He's simply the most ruthless as he rages to protect his hustling interests from encroaching thugs, all played by B-level hip-hoppers from mogul (and costar/director/producer) Damon Dash's record label.
Property 's perfunctory plot is beside the point. The film assumes that certain audiences will flock to it solely to see rappers acting. But even outsize musical personalities like N.O.R.E. and Freeway are rendered impotent when forced to deliver clunky dialogue instead of slick lyrics. In a story with no heroes, at least Dash, barely masking his glee as he shamelessly plugs his athletic wear and vodka, makes a watchable villain.

tate Property 2" is the latest proof of the axiom that movies about organized crime are really about business. So while this brutal, chaotic chronicle of heavily armed drug dealers shooting it out in the streets of Philadelphia is likely to be cited as another example of hip-hop culture's irresponsible glorification of violence, or alternatively as an example of ghetto-outlaw authenticity, it is better appreciated (or disdained) as a raw, bracing expression of the spirit of capitalism. The title may refer explicitly to the prison system - it's how the incarcerated hero bitterly thinks of himself - but it also has a socialistic ring, an evident irony in a movie devoted above all to the celebration of free enterprise. The first "State Property" picture, released in 2002, was a thuggish variation on the classic American rags-to-riches tale, tracing the dazzling rise and partial fall of a Philadelphia drug dealer named Beans (Beanie Sigel). A glowering, truculent presence, built like a squat S.U.V., Mr. Sigel bulled through that movie with more energy than skill, as if bent on dispelling the notion that rappers automatically make good screen actors. It is not saying much to point out that the sequel is better than its predecessor (directed by Abdul Malik Abbott), which was crude and amateurish in every way. This time, Damon Dash, repeating his roles as producer and as Beans's scene-stealing rival, Dame, has also taken up the duties of director. He shows competence, and even occasional flair, cobbling together a fast-moving, voice-over-heavy tribute to "Scarface," "Goodfellas" and other touchstones of the gangster canon, with room for several cameos, including ones by Mariah Carey and Ol' Dirty Bastard, who died in November. Mr. Dash also pays ample tribute to his entrepreneurial acumen. Dame, who speaks in a manic whisper, is ruthless and sensitive, and while he enjoys the usual perquisites of criminal mogulhood, he is preoccupied with the expansion and maintenance of his global business empire. The character may be Mr. Dash's sly sendup of his own imperial drive because nearly every frame of "State Property 2" shows off the products of his commercial empire. Not only do the characters wear State Property jackets, T-shirts and caps, but they seem to drink only Armadale vodka, Mr. Dash's premium brand, and wear clothes from his Rocawear line. They approach their own business, though, in a rougher, less lighthearted way, through a plot sufficiently convoluted to require a spreadsheet (or at least a half-dozen narrators). Beans, languishing in the penitentiary, is befriended by his cellmate, a devout Muslim named Freeway (Freeway), and by a voluble Floridian known as El Pollo Loco (Victor N.O.R.E. Santiago). The three concoct a complicated scheme to shore up Beans's declining share of the Philadelphia cocaine market and also settle some scores with Dame, the mention of whose name provokes fantasies of homicide. Their apparently simple plan turns out to involve enough double- and triple-crossing to nudge the plot toward its final shootout, during which everything becomes more or less clear, including the setup for "State Property 3." "State Property 2" is rated R. It has violence, profanity, sexual situations and drug use.

Slicker, funnier and more professional than its predecessor, "State Property 2," with Damon Dash at its helm, tones down the original. The stylized, lyrical violence that gave the franchise its imprimatur has become less graphic, with gore kept tastefully off-screen. Thesping has improved considerably, particularly that of rapper Beanie Sigel, whose bloody death at the end of the first "Property" was apparently hypothetical. Tongue-in-cheek 'tude soon pales, however, as pic, which opens today , relies on star cameos to fill the void left by unsustained characterizations. Still, the smart-ass complicity Dash creates with his audience may carry the day commercially.
"Beans" (Sigel) sits in jail, his empire hemorrhaging money in his henchmen's less-than-competent hands. His Muslim cellmate (a memorable turn by Freeway) hooks him up to a new boy on the block, El Loco Polo (Victor N.O.R.E. Santiago), himself an employee of the mysterious, never-seen El Plaga.
Soon, Beans is back on the street where elaborate setups pit him against longtime enemy Dame (Dash). Things don't go down exactly like the mysterious El Plaga had anticipated, and arch-rivals Beans and Dame, smelling a rat, warily join forces.
Narrated by each of the players in turn, the action is constantly undercut satirically by unexpected fast-motion, peremptory rewinds or chyroned asides. Thus during a split-screen phone conversation between Beans and his wife, each half of the screen swells or shrinks according to who is in control, until a henpecked Beans occupies a tiny diminishing square at the left of the screen.
Unlike the original "State Property," where half-naked babes were casually draped over every inch of decor when they weren't getting raped or killed, here women appear almost exclusively as ironic counterpoint. El Loco's inevitable downfall begins when he commits the faux pas 
of rescheduling his Tuesday night date (he has one for every night of the week). Dash brags about his "baddest chick" (a post-"Glitter" Mariah Carey, yet!) just before she angrily confronts him with a litany of venal complaints.
Once introduced, however, characters have no place to go. While the late Ol' Dirty Bastard's guest-shot as a nose-picking short-order cook works fine as a cameo, lead actor Dash's money-driven careerism is barely fleshed out. In the absence of any real tension, the action, which basically consists of everybody shooting everybody else or threatening to do so, feels colorless and repetitive.
No matter how idiotic the dialogue or atrocious the acting in the first "State Property," the miscellaneous massacres were well choreographed. Here, though, voiceover narration alone juices up the confrontations with a bunch of guys discharging their guns at off-screen targets: Dash's sarcastic narration comments on the "sophistication" of his homeboys' problem-solving as they open their car trunk and empty their guns into the hapless victim therein.
Tech credits are uneven. Sets and locations, noticeably free of the first "State Property's" ostentatious bling, seem underdressed and poorly defined. In keeping with pic's lighter tone, inhouse rap score eschews usual wall-to-wall aggressiveness.

The mega-club dance music scene is tough to mockumentarize. The excesses of Ibiza  bacchanals have been highly self-parodic right from the jump-off. And those fans and DJs who take their trancey transcendence quite seriously may be beyond the reach of satire. But neither that nor the fact that the scene is well past its late-'90s heyday ever dampens Canadian Michael Dowse's exuberant desire to poke belated fun. In his festival crowd-pleaser, what's all gone Pete Tong  (i.e., "wrong" in rhyme slang) is the career of DJ Frankie Wilde, a super-stoned deity of the Pacha decks. As embodied by the charismatic Brit Paul Kaye , known for his long-running role as TV's cheeky celebrity interviewer Dennis Pennis , Wilde  is a gold-toothed, projectile-puking party machine touting his flip-flop collection when he's not sailing triumphantly over the heads of adoring clubbers in a crown of thorns.
If Dowse 's parade of deadpan talking heads—still-faceless megastars like Paul Van Dyk  and Lol Hammond—seems kind of stale, his deft dancefloor swoops manage to capture the ravey thrill that eluded "electronica" cash-ins like Groove . It's all giggles until Wilde goes deaf. Then the tone changes completely. Though Kaye's performance doesn't, er, miss a beat, the director concentrates his efforts on bringing us along into Wilde's new silence. Lots of Dowse's ideas work well—the ringing tinnitus, the conversion of sound to visible waves, the trimming of treble and bass for underwatery effect, the removal of ambient noise entirely. But as the humor flags, It's All Gone Pete Tong  starts to feel more like an exercise. Also, since Wilde has mainly been a cartoon thus far, it's strange when his 24-hour party morphs into a sweet little tale about lip-reading and Photoshop  beat-matching.
Stateside, Damon Dash 's A Hard Day's Night  for the thug set, State Property 2 , continues to ensure that hip-hop's story is sold, not told. For this second extended Roc-a-Fella  records commercial, Beans (the currently incarcerated Beanie Sigel ) reprises his role as a Philly drug boss feuding with local rival Dame (Dash, natch). Improving on the first movie, Death of a Dynasty  screenwriter Adam Moreno  supplies a plot, and even a twist involving a mysterious fixer named Pollo Loco  (the low-key Noreaga ). Of course, the whole thing's just an excuse for Dash to trot out his vodka and his lineup—Beans's incessant voice-over provides a scan of leaders of major metro area crews: Harlem's Diplomats , Brooklyn 's M.O.P., Chicago's Kanye West , London's SAS.
When this flick is honest about its pimping, it has that Rat Pack charm. But attempts at real ruggish posturing—like that de rigueur sideways-gatted, full-body-exposure firing stance—are just plain laughable. Take the flashback showing Beans as a little neighborhood roughneck: After some sidewalk beat-downs, he and his pals try to steal weed from a small-time dealer who catches them breaking in. When callous little Beans wastes him, clocking his first body, grown-up Beans's commentary cuts in with the hilarious observation, "I didn't choose the game. The game chose me." Despite his devil scowl and real-life attempted-murder trial, Sigel makes a rather frumpy don of South Philly . As in Fade to Black , when he stole the show from centerpiece Jay-Z , Philly rapper Freeway  proves that even as a laconic Muslim cellmate he has more on-screen juice than Sigel.
You gotta wonder why, given the sharp drug-biz writing on The Wire , Dash doesn't smarten things up. He was a producer on 2002's much more nuanced Paid in Full  (featuring notable performances by both Cam'ron  and Wood Harris , later of Wire fame). And even if these State Property  toss-offs are just consumer primers for tag-popping teens—Ocean's Thirteen with titty-bar frosting—nobody here gets off a shot as good as Frankie Wilde's screaming in-studio exhortation, "Bang those drums like yah bang yah sistah!" With snaps like that, who needs guns anyway?
