"A State of Mind" offers a rare and often chilling glimpse into the culture of North Korea, the world's least visited country, which Nicholas D. Kristof recently described on the op-ed page of The New York Times as "the most bizarre . . . most regimented, militarized and oppressive country in the world." Directed by Daniel Gordon, a British sports journalist whose first film, "The Game of Their Lives," documented the performance of the North Korean soccer team in the 1966 World Cup competition, "A State of Mind" follows two North Korean schoolgirls, 13-year-old Pak Hyon Sun and 11-year-old Kim Song Yun, as they train for a gymnastics performance in the 2003 Mass Games. "A State of Mind" offers a rare and often chilling glimpse into the culture of North Korea, the world's least visited country, which Nicholas D. Kristof recently described on the op-ed page of The New York Times as "the most bizarre . . . most regimented, militarized and oppressive country in the world." Directed by Daniel Gordon, a British sports journalist whose first film, "The Game of Their Lives," documented the performance of the North Korean soccer team in the 1966 World Cup competition, "A State of Mind" follows two North Korean schoolgirls, 13-year-old Pak Hyon Sun and 11-year-old Kim Song Yun, as they train for a gymnastics performance in the 2003 Mass Games. This staggering spectacle, a mass celebration of nationalism, athleticism and ideological unity, brings together more than 100,000 performers in Kim Il Sung Stadium in Pyongyang, where huge teams of brightly costumed acrobats tumble and leap in precise unison as children bearing colored flashcards create ever-shifting backdrop images of battles, slogans and the omnipresent faces of Kim Il Sung, the "Great Leader" who died in 1994, and his son Kim Jong Il, the current leader. The Mass Games are the result of millions of hours of preparation and training, some of which are witnessed here as the two girls report for rehearsals that, as the games draw near, can last up to 10 hours a day. On nationally mandated holidays (which include the birthdays of Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il), the girls take a break to promenade with their families in remarkably joyless public spaces. Yet the pleasure they take in simple things - a picnic by the river, a romp with the family dog - seems genuine. The families Mr. Gordon films are unusually privileged by North Korean standards. Though their apartments are cramped and barren, they have secure jobs, enough food and even luxuries like television and radio (although, as the voiceover points out, the state-supplied radio in every North Korean house is permanently tuned to the country's single government-run station and can be turned down but never off.) In interviews, the girls' parents openly discuss some of the hardships of life in North Korea, including the famine of the mid-1990's, referred to as the Arduous March. But the film's tone remains carefully neutral. Whatever political critique the film may contain is left implicit in the jaw-dropping final sequence, in which the girls, along with hundreds of thousands of their compatriots, finally perform their long-rehearsed dance at the Mass Games before an audience of bored-looking military bureaucrats, one of whom is seen consulting his watch during the show. As for the Dear Leader himself, a final subtitle informs us that state duties kept him from being able to attend the games at all.

Those with open minds -- and maybe others, too -- will find much to engage them in "A State of Mind," an eye-opening peek at a stratum of life in North Korea via the lives of two young gymnasts prepping for Mass Games. Admirably non-judgmental docu about life in "the least visited, known, understood country in the world," per Brit director Daniel Gordon, brings a refreshing balance to the usual blind vilification of the country. Tube slots and further fest screenings -- following those in both North and South Korea -- look in the cards.
Gordon had the idea for a further film about North Korea after the success of his 2002 docu, "The Game of Their Lives," about the still-legendary visit to the U.K. of North Korea's World Cup soccer team in 1966. From February to September 2003, a British crew followed 13-year-old schoolgirl Pak Hyon-sun and her pal, Kim Song-yun, 11, through training and family life in the lead up to the Mass Games ("the largest choreographed spectacle in the world") celebrating the country's 55th anniversary.
As the elite gymnasts are initially seen in outdoor group training during freezing weather in Pyongyang, Gordon weaves in cultural and historical background on the country. Steadfastly objective narration notes that the "common belief system" imposed by founder Kim Il-song was seen as necessary in the struggle to build a strong country with its own principles of independence, summed up in the word juche
 (self-reliance).
All those interviewed trot out the usual anti-U.S. sentiments impregnated in them by a belief system -- through schooling, piped radio in apartment blocks, and the single TV channel -- partly born out of the Western powers leveling the North during the Korean War. But, as the film progresses, the families and girls emerge as much more than just government-selected talking heads. Gordon stresses that at no time did their government guides and interpreters either interfere with filming or try to censor material.
Speaking for the first time on the record to a foreign journalist, Kim's mom movingly recalls the food shortages that followed Kim Il-song's death in '94 -- a period known as "the Arduous March." No attempt is made to hide the precarious situation that self-reliance in a globalized world has led to. Rationing of one chicken and five eggs per person per month is still in force in the capital.
More interestingly on a human level, the families emerge as pretty similar to those in any other country. The girls skip homework for karaoke seshes, are bullied at school, and are as capricious, playful and subject to boredom as any other teens or pre-teens. They just happen to be superb group gymnasts dedicated to their sport.
Archive footage of past Mass Games is dazzlingly colorful -- group celebrations of cultural and political identity that seem less strange to the Asian mind (with its focus on the collective) than the Western one (with its focus on the individual). After the original games are postponed due to the SARS outbreak, during which North Korea completely sealed its borders, they're reskedded for September -- with an ironic twist.
Tech credits are top drawer, with the film climaxing in a terrific montage drawn from the actual 40-minute perf. After giving 20 shows, the two girls were back in training the next day.
Version reviewed is the "festival" one, running about three minutes longer than that aired on U.K. digital channel BBC4 since this summer. Other, shorter versions also exist for broadcast.
Camera (color, DigiBeta), Nick Bennett; editor, Peter Haddon; music, Barnaby Taylor; sound, Ashley Gobbett; additional camera, Gordon, Nicholas Bonner; associate producer, Bonner. Reviewed on videodisc, London, Nov. 5, 2004. (In Pusan Film Festival -- World Documentary.) Running time: 93 MIN. (PAL).
 


Here's the pitch: Waiting for Guffman  meets Bring It On  . . . in exotic Pyongyang ! British director Daniel Gordon 's doc A State of Mind  tracks two young gymnasts as they prep for the 2003 Mass Games, an enormous "socialist realism spectacle" dedicated to leader Kim Jong Il —who may or may not attend. The profiled tumblers, Pak Hyon Sun, 13, and her teammate Kim Song Yun , 11, are endearingly familiar—kvetching about family members, hogging food, playing hooky—which makes the de rigueur anti-American statements all the more chilling. (Even the nightly power failures are blamed on the U.S.)
The main event is the girls' elaborate, bone-crunching, months-long rehearsal, done in the service of a patriotic epic (6,000 performers, 40 shows). There's also breathtaking footage of that North Korean specialty, the stadium-placard mosaic; both large-scale productions have societal utility, subsuming the individual into a mass movement. By scoring some of the routines to vaguely techno, decidedly Western music, Gordon at times risks creating too slick a package—or is this simply the commercial half-life of propaganda?
The aftermath of the Korean War in the north is, to outsiders, both well-known and not known at all. With amazing access, Gordon captures the grand follies of the country's juche  (self-reliance) philosophy and mundane traces of paranoia, from towering statues ("We have so many heroes in this country it's impossible to count them," Pak says) to a kids' cartoon in which militaristic squirrels plot an assassination. More valuable are the detailed portraits of the two girls' families, with all their tensions and affections. (Kim's father appears the sensitive intellectual, wondering in nonbelligerent tones about the just-begun war in Iraq .) The country's woes aren't papered over—an interview with Pak's mom about the severe famine in the '90s is touted as the first such account given to a Westerner—but one leaves the film with the Twilight Zone sense that the place isn't quite the hellhole prior reports have suggested.
