 The feature-film debut of the 26-year-old Flemish filmmaker Felix van Groeningen, "Steve + Sky" is the story of how Steve (Titus De Voogdt), a scruffy small-time hoodlum just released from jail, falls for Sky (Delfine Bafort), a naïve young prostitute trying to get out of the life.  When Jean-Claude (Johan Heldenbergh), a wheelchair-bound motorcycle thief who was Steve's cellmate in prison, invites them both to help him start a strip joint in his house on the outskirts of Antwerp, Steve and Sky find themselves sharing a back room at the makeshift "club." Slowly these two inarticulate, damaged individuals begin to form a fragile bond. But when Jean-Claude decides to evade his debtors by moving to Slovenia and taking Steve with him, the couple must reassess what they really mean to each other.  With its deliberately washed-out color palette, affectless dialogue and nearly event-free story line, "Steve + Sky" is a mere slip of a movie, a wan character study of people who add up to little more than a series of studied quirks. Mr. van Groeningen reshuffles the order of some scenes and returns repeatedly to others, perhaps in an attempt to lend an aura of destiny to the lead couple's banal courtship; instead, these temporal shifts merely render the story more murky.  But at least the film can boast two strong leads: Mr. De Voogdt plays the would-be tough guy Steve with some of the restrained intensity of a young Sean Penn, while Ms. Bafort, a model, is ravishing as the self-destructive Sky, the kind of girl who handles her frustration by running headlong into walls while wearing an unending succession of stylishly punky outfits.

A pair of mismatched lowlifes drift in and out of love in stylistically muscular but narratively undernourished Dutch drama "Steve + Sky." Skewing far younger than many other Belgian pics, item could find some play in fresh-thinking fests, but is primarily a home-grown item for theatrical and homevid action.
After being released from jail for a drug deal gone awry, scrappy Kung Fu-loving miscreant Steve (Titus De Voogdt) falls in with leggy Sky (model-turned-thesp Delfine Bafort), a morose hooker who plies her trade on the motorway outside Ghent. They both end up working at a strip club run by wheelchair-bound street philosopher Jean-Claude (Johan Heldenbergh), who did time with Steve and may be Sky's long-lost father. Promising frosh helmer Felix van Groeningen exhibits a fresh eye, though his script is full of too many self-consciously Tarantino-ish verbal digressions that serve to distract from the story, and self-conscious quirks he mistakes for character development. Cast is capable, with only Heldenbergh distinguishing himself beyond what his character offers. Tech package emphasizes a nocturnal neon palette, with a pulsing score that caters to youth.
Camera (color), Ruben Impens; editor, Nico Leunen; music, Dewaele Brothers; production designer, Pol Heyvaert; costume designer, Hilde Destoop. Reviewed at Montreal World Film Festival (Cinema of Europe), Aug. 28, 2004. Running time: 97 MIN.

 


Nobody, it can be said, has had as great an impact and influence on cinema history with as little film—less than three hours, all told—than Jean Vigo, demi-surréaliste , anarchist's son, and Keats-like consumptive martyr. At BAM, the movies bearing Vigo 's footprint mostly reflect Zero for Conduct  (1933), an impetuous schoolyard revolution that was virtually remade, albeit with tommy guns, as Lindsay Anderson 's If . . . (1968), the still-underrated capstone to the British New Wave. But the imprint is also detected on Elia Kazan 's Splendor in the Grass  (1961)—shot by Vigo DP Boris Kaufman, brother of Dziga Vertov —and Bernardo Bertolucci 's Godardian-Marxist ode Before the Revolution  (1964). Individualizing Vigo's more generalized juvenile insurrection, Fran Truffaut 's The 400 Blows  (1959) seems a natural choice, but Ken Loach 's Truffaut-esque Kes  (1969) is, relatively speaking, out of left field. (Where's Heathers ?) But that's fine: Being a Vigoienne, I'd give Zero 's precious 41-minute rebel yell credit for molding most of 20th-century culture's genuine triumphs.
Frederick Wiseman 's High School  (1968) is a chilling answer to Vigo's utopian fantasia, but then, Columbia Revolt  (1968), a collectively made, hour-long document of the 1968 student uprising, could be said to answer Wiseman, with appropriate élan and fury. L'Atalante  (1934) may be Vigo's greatest work, but its dreamy ambivalence has been less iconic; here, Leos Carax 's Les Amants du Pont-Neuf  (1991) thieves from Vigo's riverboat odyssey, and Another Girl, Another Planet  (1992), by indie idiosyncrat Michael Almereyda  (who shares Vigo's real surname), transposes Vigo's romantic anti-romanticism to the East Village  by way of a Fisher-Price  Pixelvision camera.
