 With good taste and great speed, Isabella Stewart Gardner of Boston spent the last decade of the 19th century (and a very large inheritance) amassing first-rate European art. She opened her collection to the public in 1903, and when she died some 20 years later, left behind a will stipulating that no object ever be moved or replaced.  On March 18, 1990, two thieves disguised as Boston police officers ransacked the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum of some of its most precious holdings: works by Manet, Degas, Flinck and Rembrandt. The theft of these treasures was a big loss to the small museum, but nothing compared with the jewel in its crown, "The Concert" by Vermeer, cut from its frame and missing to this day. It  may be the world's most expensive stolen painting. It is surely the most beloved.  Vermeer devotees, some with tears in their eyes, are among those interviewed in "Stolen," a documentary by Rebecca Dreyfus that recounts the Gardner theft and the efforts to retrieve its masterpieces. Rife with conspiracy and colorful characters, this globe-trotting intrigue has the makings of a splendid thriller, but Ms. Dreyfus has fashioned only a middling documentary, failing to locate a compelling structure or rhythm in the material.  She does, however, stumble onto a captivating hero in Harold Smith, a well-known art detective who investigates the Gardner theft. Spindly, perspicacious and wry, Mr. Smith cuts a dapper figure despite his face bandages and prosthetic nose, the accouterments of late-phase skin cancer. He suggests a cross between Sherlock Holmes, Ichabod Crane and the Phantom of the Opera, and recovers some interest for "Stolen.

The as-yet-unsolved March 18, 1990, heist at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston netted paintings by Degas, Rembrandt and Manet, but it is Vermeer's "The Concert" that was -- and is -- the most painfully missed of all the stolen works of art. This is due to Dutch artist's comparatively limited output, early death and the near-universal affection felt for his paintings -- an affection mirrored in Rebecca Dreyfus' "Stolen," a docu that should appeal not just to the legion of Vermeer fans, but to lovers of good mystery. Upscale and arts-oriented specialty venues and public TV beckon.
Since it's a mystery without resolution, subject is a difficult one to make suspenseful, although Dreyfus works magic with what few strands of hope remain attached to finding the missing masterworks. Via an imaginative use of still photos, 19th-century archival material, pictorial publications and the paintings themselves, she lays out the case and, wisely, builds it around two characters who couldn't be more different, or contrast more poignantly.
One is Isabella Stewart Gardner, the 19th century socialite who, upon the death of an infant son, moved to Europe with her husband and proceeded to amass an art collection now worth billions. Gardner, we're told, was also disappointed in her looks; perhaps she compensated by buying up the beauty of the world.
The other character is Harold Smith, a contemporary "art detective" whose face is scarred by skin cancer. Earthy, intelligent and wonderfully humorous -- he jokes about his prosthetic nose having once fallen off during a meeting with agents of Lloyds of London -- he is Dreyfus' guide to the world of stolen art, as well as a poignant counterbalance to the 100-year-old Gardner story. Indeed, Smith is far more likable than Gardner who, despite endowing a wonderful museum, forbid it in her will to change.
This might be why Boston Herald reporter Tom Mashberg says of the robbery, "There was something rude about it," as if the old lady herself had been held up at gunpoint.
More chilling are the various explanations for where the missing art might be. Invoked are the Irish Republican Army, Boston Irish mobsters like James "Whitey" Bulger and various lowlifes, several of whom talk frankly to Dreyfus about the mechanics of art theft. "I had at one time planned to rob the place," says Myles Connor, who once took a Rembrandt from the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
The Gardner museum was a security joke, Dreyfus insists, in not so many words. What she doesn't say, and one wishes she had, is something about the mind of a person who would steal, or order stolen, a great work of art and effectively remove it from the world. If the Vermeer, and its fellow hostages, aren't in limbo between criminals, prosecutors and politicians, Dreyfus implies, then they're on someone's bedroom wall.
Gardner (voiced by Blythe Danner), in one of her letters to her art dealer, the legendary Bernard Berenson (Campbell Scott), speaks of the privilege of being able to see her paintings anytime and any way she wanted. Dreyfus might have taken a cue from this observation to explore the psychology of possession, and possessiveness, and how it differs in art buyers and art thieves.
Camera (color, 16mm/DV) Albert Maysles, Dreyfus; editors, Markus A. Peters, Liz Ludden; music, Peter Golub; associate producers, Chelsea Horenstein, Sharon Guskin. Reviewed at Sarasota Film Festival, Feb. 5, 2005. Running time: 84 MIN.
 

Narrators:
 Blythe Danner (voice of Isabella Stewart Gardner), Campbell Scott (voice of Bernard Berenson).
 


A fancy-feast doc about art theft, Rebecca Dreyfus 's Stolen  has all the earmarks of a ropy New Yorker  article—the plumbing of a little-known underworld, high-end art scene glamour, a cast of wily eccentrics on both sides of the law, and even a reporter subtly adding herself to the mix. Fine, if several cable stations (including co-producer Court TV ) weren't doing this sort of thing so frequently it's become a channel-surfing cliché. As a movie, Dreyfus's sub-prime-time hour's worth of material—about the 1990 heist of Rembrandts, Degases, and a Vermeer from a low-security Boston museum, amounting to an untollable sum—is dressed up with mushy bio of original museum benefactor Isabella Stewart Gardner  and a repetitive array of Vermeerians mooning over the loss of The Concert . Central is the startling figure of Harold Smith , a "Renowned Fine Art Detective" (as Dreyfus's caption delicately puts it) who, as a result of a half-century battle with skin cancer, cuts a wicked figure with eye patch, prosthetic nose, scars, black derby, and custom-cut suits. Despite the soft-spoken Smith, a type-A British liaison self-named the Turbocharger, and the apparent involvement of the IRA, the doc prioritizes flash over facts, leaving you pining for the New Yorker  exposé it could've been.
