If nothing else, “The Stoning of Soraya M.’’ is truth in titling. Soraya M. gets stoned  - and not in a Harold and Kumar way. The projectiles are rocks as opposed to hydroponic grass. And, appropriately enough, this is less a movie than a blunt instrument, a bit of political parable, a bit more outrage, and nary a scrap of real drama or finesse.
“Soraya M.’’ wants to dismay its Western art house audiences with an all-too-real problem faced by women in some Islamic societies: a denial of rights. It’s a BBC report dragged to feature length, complete with the flagrantly styled climactic title event.
Directed by Cyrus Nowrasteh, an American who with his wife, Betsy Giffen Nowrasteh, adapted Freidoune Sahebjam’s novel, the movie gives us the story of a young Iranian woman, played by Mozhan Marnò, accused of adultery by her husband, Ali (Parviz Sayyad). Fans of US made-for-TV movies will recognize Ali as the kind of abusive peacock who once tormented Melissa Gilbert, Markie Post, and Valerie Bertinelli, to name a paltry few.
When he’s not beating the mother of his four kids, he’s cruising around the village in a sports car with another woman in the passenger seat. He would really love to marry the teenage daughter of a doctor in town, and sees a great opportunity to get rid of Soraya after a villager’s wife dies. Ali volunteers his wife to help the widower with his home and children. She reluctantly takes the job. The money is good; maybe she can use it to leave Ali. But from the minute she starts working, Ali manufactures jealous rage at the smiling she does at the widower and at the  fact that their hands touch. Before long Ali is talking with the village elders about Soraya. The sentence for her alleged infidelity is death by public stoning. (“When a man accuses his wife,’’ an elder says, “she must prove her innocence. That is the law.’’)
This is serious injustice presented as the stuff of silent movies. The camera can’t get enough of incriminating shots of Soraya talking with her new boss. The plot against her  - and it does happen to be a plot  - is ludicrous. At no point is the young, very attractive Soraya allowed to say to her accusers, “Look at me, and look at him. Do you honestly think I would risk my life by sleeping with this dimwitted old man? Where are we, in a Woody Allen picture?’’ Clearing her name  falls to her aunt (Shohreh Aghdashloo), who whirls around the village prevailing upon the men in charge to rethink their sentence. But, alas, we’re not talking about “The Woman Who Stopped the Stoning of Soraya M.’’
As much as the movie is a call to anger, it’s also a rare showcase for Aghdashloo and her otherworldly croak. Since “The House of Sand and Fog,’’ it’s been a diet of small, thankless parts. (She did spend a memorable season on “24,’’ but still.) “Soraya M.’’ has Aghdashloo advising, pleading, weeping. Yet, much as it delights me to see her in more than  10 percent of a movie, there’s almost no reason for her character to participate in the proceedings except as the grandest emoter in Iran. Aghdashloo tells Soraya’s story to the unwanted Iranian-French journalist who’s just come to town and has a prayer of escaping with his life and tape recorder.
Jim Caviezel wears a beak nose to play the reporter, and while we sit through Soraya’s stoning, we think of the suffering he endured as Jesus in “The Passion of the Christ.’’ The movie is clearly going for the same effect. But the suffering here is more about human tragedy than holy sacrifice. It’s a ghastly, overwrought sequence. The sound of rocks being clapped by little boys and old men becomes a kind of music. The slow-motion is a cheap, hacky flourish. Every man in her life takes a turn pelting Soraya, who, as part of the ritual, is buried alive in the ground up to her chest. Her father, her husband, and the local mullah all get thriller music; piano for the sons, and strings for the rest of town. Men chant “Allah Akbar!’’ while women weep.
Director Nowrasteh seems to think the only way to save lives is to sensationalize death. You could trek to the  theater and have this movie whack you upside the head. You could also just mail a check for $10 to the human rights group of your choice.
.

         "The Stoning of Soraya M." lives up to its title quite literally -- and rightly so, for it is important to understand just how cruel and drawn-out this ancient form of execution is and how prevalent it remains, not just in Iran, the film's setting, but in countries throughout the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa that follow Islamic Sharia law.

The timing of the film's release is apt, for it serves as a metaphor for the current protests in Iran against the long-standing oppressiveness of the Islamic Republic.



         






  Based on a true story recounted in the late Freidoune Sahebjam's book, "The Stoning of Soraya M." was filmed in a remote mountain village in an undisclosed Middle Eastern country. Jim Caviezel is cast as Sahebjam, an eminent Iranian journalist based in France who is passing through the village when he is accosted by a distraught woman, Zahra (Shohreh Aghdashloo), who prevails upon him to tape the terrible story she has to tell. 

Only the day before, her niece Soraya (Mozhan Marnò) was executed in the town square by stoning. Her husband, Ali (Navid Negahban), who has the village leaders in his thrall, had concocted a flimsy and completely false charge of adultery against Soraya, the mother of their four children, so that he can be free to marry a 14-year-old girl; Soraya had refused to divorce Ali because she had no other means of support.

What is so compelling about this film, directed by Cyrus Nowrasteh, an American of Iranian descent who adapted Sahebjam's 1994 book with his wife, Betsy Giffen Nowrasteh, is the way religion can be exploited in the most obscene and hypocritical manner by those in power to oppress others -- and how total power over others can corrupt totally. Islam happens to be the religion here, but what happens in the course of this important and uncompromising film recalls evils perpetrated in the name of Christianity and other organized religions as well.

"The Stoning of Soraya M." goes well beyond its angry didacticism and its specific indictment of men's oppression of women to achieve the impact of a Greek tragedy through its masterful grasp of suspense and group psychology, and some superb acting, especially on the parts of Marnò in the title role of a courageous martyr and the commanding Aghdashloo, Oscar nominated for her performance in "The House of Sand and Fog." 



   

 “The Stoning of Soraya M.,” a true story of religiously sanctioned misogyny and mob violence in an Iranian village, thoroughly blurs the line between high-minded outrage and lurid torture-porn.  Not since “The Passion of the Christ” has a film depicted a public execution in such graphic detail. In the approximately 20 minutes during which the killing unfolds, the camera repeatedly returns to study the battered face and body of the title character (Mozhan Marno) as she is stoned to death. Buried up to her waist in a hole dug for the occasion, she is pelted with rocks and profanity by the male villagers, including her father, husband and two sons, until she dies.  The condemned woman is innocent of the charge of adultery brought against her by her sadistic husband, Ali (Navid Negahban), who wants to get rid of her so he can marry a 14-year-old girl. According to ancient Islamic law, a wife’s adultery is punishable by death. Ali pressures the corrupt local bigwigs to prosecute her based on the rumors he ignited and false evidence they coerce from a widower for whom she has worked as a housekeeper.  In one of the film’s sickeningly exploitative touches, Ali, wearing a triumphal grin, examines his wife’s crumpled, blood-drenched body to make sure she is dead and discovers signs of life in a rolled-up eye. The stoning is promptly resumed.  The casting of Jim Caviezel as Freidoune Sahebjam, the Paris-based Iranian journalist whose 1994 best seller. “The Stoning of Soraya M.: A True Story,” recounted the incident, lends the movie a queasy connection to “The Passion of the Christ,” in which Mr. Caviezel played Jesus.  Directed by Cyrus Nowrasteh, who wrote the screenplay with his wife, Betsy Giffen Nowrasteh, and filmed in an unidentified location to avoid possible reprisals, the movie re-enacts events that took place in Kupayeh, a small village in southwestern Iran, in August 1986. Mr. Sahebjam had surreptitiously returned to Iran from Paris to report on life under the Islamic government, then only seven years old.  Stranded in the village when his car breaks down, he is accosted by Soraya’s aunt Zahra (Shohreh Aghdashloo, familiar from “House of Sand and Fog”), who asks him to tape-record her account of her niece’s killing the day before. (In the book, two weeks have passed.) Ms. Aghdashloo, with her deep, husky voice, brings an anguished intensity to leaden, redundant dialogue that rings like strident editorial boilerplate. The screenplay’s oratorical tone is partly intentional, since the movie’s heavy-handed style harks back to the kind of 1950s Hollywood quasi-biblical parables starring Victor Mature and Jean Simmons that paraded themselves as sacred.  Visually as well as narratively, the movie embraces extremes. The village is arid, the countryside around it paradisically lush. In one scene birds flying out of the bushes are compared to angels as John Debney’s mystically overawed music pours on the syrup. Almost everything is either-or. Soraya is a beautiful martyred innocent and Zahra a stormy feminist prophet. With the exception of the mayor (David Diaan), who has qualms about the execution, and Mr. Caviezel’s reporter, who appears only briefly at the beginning and end of the movie, the men are fiendishly villainous.  Mr. Negahban’s Ali, who resembles a younger, bearded Philip Roth, suggests an Islamic fundamentalist equivalent of a Nazi anti-Semitic caricature. With his malevolent smirk and eyes aflame with arrogance and hatred, he is as satanic as any horror-movie apparition. The fraudulent local mullah, who collaborates in his scheme after being rejected by Soraya, might as well be carrying a pitchfork and breathing fire.  Yet it must be said that “The Stoning of Soraya M.” wields a crude power. At last year’s Toronto International Film Festival, the movie was voted runner-up to “Slumdog Millionaire” for the audience choice award. As “The Passion of the Christ” showed, the stimulation of blood lust in the guise of moral righteousness has its appeal.  “The Stoning of Soraya M.” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes profanity and extreme violence.  THE STONING OF SORAYA M.
For those ambivalent about whether stoning women to death is a cruel punishment or not, here's The Stoning Of Soraya M. , a dutifully plodding, if watchable, dramatization of a real, particularly appalling application of sharia law in small-town Iran . Soraya (Mozhan Marnò) refuses to divorce abusive husband Ali (Navid Negahban ), because he won't leave her enough money to feed her children, so he teams up with their village's mullah to start a rumor that she's committing adultery, punishable by death. Events take their inevitable course, with Soraya's BFF (played by Shohreh Aghdashloo ) narrating, and Soraya gets to live out the title in a bloody and prolonged sequence reminiscent of The Passion of the Christ —which is appropriate, since Jim Caviezel  pops up here, speaking creditable Farsi as the journalist who blows the whole thing up. Director Cyrus Nowrasteh  gives the proceedings more flair than is usual for the explicitly didactic: If his ideas (the camera rocketing on the stones thrown at Soroya, as if they were Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves ' arrows all over again) are bad, at least he's trying. But this is basically self-congratulatory fare for people who feel more "politically conscious" when reminded that women in the Islamic world can have it rough. Right now, you're better off just watching the news.
