The writer-director team of Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck work in a tradition of open-eyed liberal humanism, but they're also shrewd enough to play off expectations of Hollywood   heroism. Their first feature, Half Nelson , stoked the audience's desire to see an inspirational-teacher drama before it turned into the tale of a gifted teacher who was a self-destructive crackhead flake. In their second film, Sugar , they set us up for a classic feel-good sports drama about a nobody who triumphs.
The film follows a young pitcher from the Dominican Republic, Miguel ''Sugar'' Santos (Algenis Perez Soto), who has a baby face and a killer corkscrew curve. Drafted into the American minor leagues, with the hope that he'll become a star, he journeys to the strange land of Iowa, where he joins a single-A team and moves in with a genial farm family. Boden and Fleck trace Sugar's story with an almost anthropological eye. The kid barely speaks English (just ordering French toast at a diner is an exotic experience), but he gets plugged into a world of malls and groupies, and Soto plays him with a haunted and captivating thousand-yard stare. Just as we're getting swept up in his field of dreams (and his loss of innocence), Sugar  tosses us a major curveball I won't reveal. The film's style is so ''objective'' it's a bit subdued, yet this is a sports drama of total originality, as well as the most authentic inside view of the immigrant experience the movies have given us in quite a while.
See all current movie reviews from EW

 There is something undeniably noble and beautiful about the love of sports: the appreciation of grace and excellence for their own sakes,  the pleasure of competition, the discipline of training. But the practice of big-time sports is often cruel and corrupt, a business built on the exploitation of young people and the peddling of impossible dreams. This basic contradiction will be in vivid evidence this weekend, during the national college basketball championships. It is also, at least implicitly, a central concern in “Sugar,” a wise and lovely new film by Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck.  “Sugar,” which follows a young pitcher from a training camp in the Dominican Republic to a minor-league club in Iowa (and beyond),  is infused with a deep affection for baseball, the rhythms of which are nimbly captured by a narrative pace and editing style that quicken and relax as necessary. The small details and rituals of the game — the locker room banter, the on-field surges of intensity and the tedium of the dugout — are captured with subtlety and without egg-headed, glorious-pastime sententiousness.  It is their belief in the dignity of the sport that allows Ms. Boden and Mr. Fleck to turn a quietly critical eye on its economic workings and social consequences. Though it tells a fictional story, “Sugar” belongs on a shelf with “Hoop Dreams,” another great film that challenges us to shed our illusions about sports even as we retain our capacity to delight in the games themselves.  Miguel Santos is certainly capable of such delight. Nicknamed Azúcar (Spanish for sugar), and played by a marvelously expressive and likable young nonprofessional actor named Algenis Pérez Soto, he is sweet and easygoing, but also fiercely competitive and a bit cocky.  Like many young Dominican men who demonstrate some baseball talent, he was signed by an American professional team (the fictitious Kansas City Knights) as a teenager. Sugar and his fellow recruits live in a training center that in some ways resembles a prep school, in others a prison. An armed guard stands at the gate, and practices are observed from what looks like a guard tower.  On weekends, Miguel goes home to his village to visit with his family and his girlfriend, and to hang out with slightly older men whose own dreams of major-league glory have evaporated or expired.  In their previous feature, “Half Nelson,” Ms. Boden and Mr. Fleck, a married couple who live in Brooklyn, seemed at first to be working within a familiar, somewhat dubious genre, the heroic urban  teacher melodrama. But by making the teacher in question (played by Ryan Gosling) not only a drug addict but also, more important, a complicated individual whose moral confusion was hard to separate from his political idealism, they upended easy, sentimental assumptions about race, class and urban life.  Something similar happens in “Sugar.”  For more than half its running time the film seems to be following the narrative structure of a standard sports story, unfolding through the triumphs and reversals of a single, fateful season. After a stint in spring training in Arizona, Miguel finds himself in  Iowa, boarding with an elderly local couple and trying out his stuff in front of some pretty demanding hometown crowds as a starting pitcher for the Bridgetown Swing.  Off the field he socializes with his fellow Spanish-speaking ballplayers, befriends a former college star and conducts a tentative flirtation with the strawberry-blond, churchgoing granddaughter of his hosts, who wants him for spiritual or carnal purposes, or both. (Here in America we may accept the constitutional separation of church and state, but church and sex are much harder to keep apart.) On the field Miguel hits his stride early, is slowed down by an injury, faces various temptations and then ...  But see for yourself. The game of baseball, ungoverned by the clock, is notoriously full of surprises, and the surprise of “Sugar” — I don’t mean the major third-act plot twist, which is astonishing when it happens and utterly logical in retrospect — is that it’s not really about baseball at all. It’s about, among other things, the way America looks through the eyes of a stranger, about the beauty of the Caribbean, the Midwest and the South Bronx (skillfully evoked by the cinematographer Andrij Parekh), and about what it is to be a young man full of desire and potential in a world that seems starkly divided between haves and have-nots, success and failure.  Perhaps nowhere are these divisions more extreme than in the world of professional sports, which beguiles some of the poorest people in the hemisphere with specters of fabulous wealth. But even in that world, a lot of space is taken up by the middle ground: the modest paychecks sent to the family back home; the careers that culminate neither in glory  nor in disgrace, but that flare up and peter out; the tiny increment of luck or timing that separates strike three from ball four.  And so “Sugar” walks away from clichés about the thrill of victory or the agony of defeat, preferring to contemplate the satisfactions and frustrations that lie in between.  It is both sad and hopeful, but the film’s sorrow and its optimism  arise from its rarest and most thrilling quality, which is its deep and humane honesty.

With a gently observant eye more on the lookout for revelatory cultural detail and emotional truth than for melodramatic excitement, "Sugar" intriguingly draws the curtain back on the seldom considered world of Dominican baseball players trying to make it in the United States. Sympathetic, genial and exceedingly wholesome, it's a film that, once seen, will permanently and favorably influence the way viewers regard the characters' real-life counterparts. HBO Films offering will be well received wherever it plays, notably in Latin America; expansion beyond highly specialized situations in Stateside theatrical release would be daunting. 
Although Dominican former World Series MVP Jose Rijo was a principal advisor and even appears here as an actor, Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck's follow-up to their widely admired "Half-Nelson" is no conventional success story of a young man stirringly bucking the odds to rise from obscurity to triumph. Rather, it takes stock of many the factors that can tip the balance for or against even a genuinely talented athlete to go all the way with his God-given gifts.
In the case of "Sugar," there are considerations that work in both directions as far as young Dominican hopefuls are concerned. Due to the D.R.'s massive success in sending top players to the U.S. Major Leagues --Juan Marichal, Sammy Sosa and Pedro Martinez rep just the beginning of the list -- the training of potential stars has become a significant industry on the island, with well run baseball academies, American team reps on the ground to scout and develop talent, and local coaches drilling their charges in English baseball lingo.
If you're any good, you're bound to be noticed, which is what happens to 19-year-old Miguel "Sugar" Santos (Algenis Perez Soto), a sweet kid with a mean knuckle curveball. As with so many others in his small town of San Pedro De Macoris, Sugar's family hopes he'll be one of the lucky young men signed by an American team to a minor league assignment up north, which alone provides an income well beyond what's possible locally.
On home turf, Sugar is loose and confident, with a girlfriend and a healthy sense of self, so he's not surprised when he, with a few others, is called up for spring training.
First stop is Arizona, where there are nice moments as the youngsters behold the splendor of the facilities and repeatedly order only French toast at a local diner for lack of English to explore the menu further.
Sugar's sharp stuff earns him a trip to the Single-A team in Bridgetown, Iowa, where he's assigned to board with the Higgins family on its bucolic farm. The senior couple, avid ball fans who put players up every spring, are very old-fashioned and couldn't be nicer, and their religious teenage daughter Anne (Ellary Porterfield), threatens to be more than that. But the sense of isolation clearly weighs on Sugar, who, for the simple reason of the language barrier, has no one to talk to except for Jorge (Rayniel Rufino), an old friend from the island who's still stuck on the Bridgetown Swing team due to a lingering injury.
Sugar's season starts with a bang as he racks up a dizzying number of strikeouts. But there are many small incidents which, together, feed his sense of dislocation and inwardness: Lack of familiar food, Anne's uncertain offerings of intimacy and her well-intentioned but awkward inclusion of Sugar in a religious youth club gathering, a racial incident at a nightclub where local boys hassle Latins dancing with white girls, and the related issue of the lack of any Spanish-speaking ladies to date (by contrast, he hears that Dominican friends playing in Arizona have more women than they can handle).
When Sugar sustains a minor injury that puts him on the sidelines for a spell, inaction and solitariness trigger a downward spiral soon to be exacerbated by the arrival of a fresh Dominican pitching sensation who makes Sugar old news. But Sugar's odyssey does not end there, taking some unexpected turns on its way to an open ending.
Observing without editorializing, Boden and Fleck open a hitherto unexplored world in a work that, in line with its title, leans toward the sweet rather than the gritty. Obstacles and pressures notwithstanding, Sugar's journey is seen as more of a life adventure than a do-or-die enterprise that will spell tragedy if not accomplished successfully; after all, most wannabe players from all locations never make it to the bigs, and far fewer still become stars.
The other side of this refreshing approach, however, is a lack of urgency and juice; only fleetingly does the film convey the thrill of competition, the anxiety of anticipation, the game's exhilarating highs and devastating lows, the complexity of friendships among young men competing for the same few available slots, the often raucous, taunting and bawdy camaraderie among jocks. Rather, the feeling the film imparts is of a knowledgeable inside view rather than a fully felt subjective one.
Pic evocatively captures its various settings, nicely contrasting the pristine Dominican training camps with the ramshackle towns and using deft brushstrokes to paint the splendid isolation of the Iowa farmlands. Language issues are also nicely handled, with some Americans courteously making an effort to simplify their speech to enable Sugar to understand while he himself makes slow progress in the foreign tongue.
The lanky Perez Soto makes for an ingratiating lead, and his actual background as a teen player (the Dominican thesps were chosen from among baseball players rather than actors) means that he's entirely convincing on the field. Pic could have used more engaging involvement from supporting players, most of whom make minimal impressions.

Anna Boden  and Ryan Fleck  have transformed some of the saggiest, most clichéd genres with smarts, non-screechy politics, superb acting, and visual beauty. Though, on paper, its premise could have easily elicited groans, Half Nelson— their 2006 feature debut (that Fleck directed and the two co-wrote) about a white middle-class Brooklyn  basehead who teaches poor African-American junior-high kids about dialectics, forming a friendship with one of them—is free of all "each one, teach one" inanities found in hooey like Dangerous Minds . A sensitive treatment of race, class, history, privilege, and self-pity, Half Nelson  is also one of the few intelligent films about friendship between an adult and a child.
Sugar , which premiered to great acclaim in Sundance 2008, tackles even hoarier terrain: the sports movie and the immigrant story. Though its release date falls two days before the start of Major League Baseball season, Sugar , while certainly diamond-specific, is less about America's pastime than the fallacies of the American dream. It's also a much more expansive, ambitious project—both geographically (Sugar  was shot on location in the Dominican Republic , Phoenix, Iowa, and the Bronx ) and linguistically (most of the film is in Spanish) than the Gowanus -set Half Nelson.  The titular hero is 19-year-old Miguel "Sugar" Santos (played by the remarkable first-time, nonprofessional actor Algenis Perez Soto), a star pitcher for a farm team in Boca Chica , D.R., who impresses a gringo talent scout with his curveball and is invited to spring training in Phoenix, quickly advancing to a single-A team in Bridgetown , Iowa. Each disparate place is sharply observed but never judged. Without a trace of didacticism, Boden and Fleck portray the insidious details of exploitation and hollow American maxims. In the English classes that Sugar and his teammates must take at the training facility in Boca Chica, they parrot back not just "ground ball!" and "home run!" but also "I'll do my best." Sugar, who quit school at 16 to sign with the farm team, leaves behind the addition he's building for his family's house in dusty San Pedro  to board a plane for the first time. The dutiful son sends most of his $562 checks back home to his garment-worker mother, somehow not enraged by the Stanford-grad teammate who was signed for one million dollars.
Bunking in Bridgetown with Mr. and Mrs. Higgins, an essentially benign elderly couple prone to haranguing their houseguest about his athletic performance, Sugar grows increasingly isolated by language and Corn Belt custom. "No chikkas  in the bedroom," "No cervesas  in the casa, " his hosts lecture in their loony Midwestern Spanglish. Far from casting the Iowans as yokels, Fleck and Boden nonetheless capture certain believable heartland specifics: a racist scuffle in a club, misunderstood signals from the Higginses' church-group-leading granddaughter, and, in one of the film's most beautiful scenes, a fluid, back-of-the-head long take as Sugar exits his hotel room and ambles through several different bumptious, neon-nightmare video arcades and bowling alleys. (Andrij Parekh , who lensed Half Nelson,  continues his excellent work here.)
It's no spoiler to say that Sugar doesn't lead his team to victory, doesn't make it big, doesn't believe empty sports rhetoric like, "The true test of our character is how we come back," and doesn't assimilate. Struggling on the mound, increasingly aware that poor Latinos like him are used and discarded in the States' minor-league system like stale chaw, he simply decides, "I wasn't gonna wait for them to throw me out." His field of dreams is found in the Bronx's Roberto Clemente  Ballfields, where love of the game is untainted by big business. Sugar starts over in New York, but his future is far from certain—a state of apprehension mixed with hope wonderfully conveyed by Soto 's shifting facial expressions in the final scene. Like Half Nelson , Sugar  concludes with thoroughly earned yet cautious optimism. In their subversion of "inspirational" genres, Boden and Fleck don't want us to be any less moved by the struggles and realizations of their protagonists. The filmmakers simply insist that we are fully aware of a character's internal and external obstacles—that tidy redemptions have no place in a complicated world.
