 There are many different ways to drop off the grid, but few dropped off with such style and urgency as Dorian Paskowitz, the paterfamilias of what is lovingly and at times enviably described as the first family of surfing. It was an intensity in part born of his passionately felt engagement with history as a Jew, which took him from Stanford Medical School  in the 1940s to button-down respectability in the  1950s and,  thereafter, on the road and into the blue yonder with a devoted wife, nine children, a succession of battered campers and the surfboards that were by turns the family’s cradles,  playpens, lifelines and shields.  You meet Mr. Paskowitz, or Doc,  straight away in the documentary “Surfwise,” Doug Pray’s wonderfully engaging look at love and family and the relentless pursuit of happiness, personal meaning and perfect waves. At least half the battle in the documentary is finding a worthy subject,  and few live up to their screen time as easily as Doc, a born pitchman, part carny, part evangelical, who even in his 80s continues to spread the Paskowitz gospel (clean living, clean surfing) with fervor. It’s Doc who revs up the story, opening the family’s book of life while doing unclothed calisthenics in front of Mr. Pray’s hovering camera. As he shares his philosophy and leathery skin, Doc doesn’t earn your attention — he commands it.  Mr. Pray, a filmmaker with a thing for youth subcultures (his earlier films include “Hype!,” about the Seattle  music scene), has an easygoing, accessible, silky-smooth style. Working with a tight team — Dave  Homcy shot the movie on digital, and Lasse Jarvi edited it — he makes documentary filmmaking of this sort look deceptively easy. It isn’t, though you wouldn’t know it from how seamlessly he and his team integrate the talking-head interviews (the speakers helpfully identified); the locations (California, Hawaii, Israel); home movies; and news clips. Mr. Pray throws so many images and so much information at you — people and places, anecdotes and grudges — you may not immediately notice that all this groovy material has been marshaled into a very neat and conventional structure.  That’s less a complaint than an observation. “Surfwise” has a bohemian vibe and a cool sheen, but it’s an eager-to-please, pleasing commercial enterprise with a reassuring narrative arc (happy, sad, happy). Once Doc’s origin story has been told (the movie says he introduced surfing to Israel),   the story moves into its most fascinating phase, namely that stretch in the 1960s and ’70s when he and his wife, Juliette, a Mexican-American looker with an  apparently sturdy constitution, raised, with next to no money, eight boys and one girl — David, Jonathan, Abraham, Israel, Moses, Adam, Salvador Daniel, Navah and Joshua — in a 24-foot camper. A few family members repeat the number 24 as if they still can’t believe it; I’m more wowed by the number 9.  Doc, one of his sons explains with a mirthless laugh, was trying to repopulate the world with Jews. Certainly Doc’s sense of himself as a Jew who had escaped the Holocaust only by an accident of birth, by growing up in Southern California, hit him hard and kept hitting him. After two unhappy marriages and an unsatisfying professional  stint in Hawaii, where he had settled after Stanford, Doc shed his worldly belongings and old ways, discovered the joys of sex (he’s hilariously ribald on the specifics of that joy) and dedicated himself to uncompromised, uncompromising freedom, embracing the road like Jack Kerouac, one difference being that this dharma bum had a ready-made commune. He fled the greater world, creating a smaller, manageable one in its place.  For a time, the world Doc made fit neatly into that 24-foot camper. Nut brown and slender, the Paskowitz children were beautiful, ideal subjects for an exhilarating, persuasively liberating experiment. But they were also somewhat like lab rats, given to little nips that, in time, as childish energy morphed into adolescent aggression, evolved into violence bordering on the pathological. “I loved supporting the Reich,” says David, the eldest son, who became the captain in an increasingly authoritarian regime. David’s choice of words is pretty startling, particularly given that this is an observant Jewish family. But Mr. Pray, who tends to glide rather than dig, doesn’t root around in Doc’s psychology or the family’s hurt. He pauses and then he moves on.  From the on-screen evidence and from all those talking Paskowitz heads, it appears that the family mostly moved on too. That, at least, is the story that both they and Mr. Pray have chosen to tell. It’s a good, generally warming  story, one that made me want to grab a surfboard or at least check out the family’s famous surf camp in San Diego, which, as it happens, was attended by  Tommy Means,  who along with Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair, and    Jonathan Paskowitz, helped produce the movie.  That further explains its clubby feel and perhaps Mr. Pray’s reluctance to push hard. The family that surfs together, it seems, stays together, in poverty and success, wipeouts and comebacks alike.  “Surfwise” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Salty language, tasty waves.

Kids used to want to run away with the circus. Youth from the last three decades or so might have been more tempted by the lifestyle of the Paskowitz clan, which spent years roaming in their 24-foot camper, suffering no education more formal than that provided by surfing the world's waves. Of course, this can't be as idyllic as it sounds. As the latest docu from Doug Pray ("Hype!" "Scratch") details, it wasn't, by a longshot. "Surfwise" should get plenty of ink as the latest nonfiction portrait of a weird family. Appeal to surf-flick devotees provides another hook for theatrical exposure.
Strapping young M.D. Dorian "Doc" Paskowitz virtually introduced surfing to Israel before trying to settle down with two failed first marriages and a stint of high-flying careerism -- "the most miserable part of my life," he now says. Then he met gorgeous Juliette, and decided their path would be on the open road.
A series of decrepit used campers was home to the bed-sharing family as one birth followed another for a decade. Taking only low-to-no-pay temp doctoring posts among the poor, keeping everyone on a strict health diet (one sib accurately describes the usual meal as "gruel"), preferring to have as few monetary or material assets as possible, Doc raised his brood as free as birds -- in theory.
In actuality, we gradually learn, he could be a violent, mood-swinging disciplinarian and publicity hound whose notions of loyalty were better suited to military than family life. His insistence that the kids be kept isolated from the standard social norms he had rejected only in adulthood -- proper schooling, peer exposure, stable community -- left them poorly equipped to handle the world when each finally, painfully, broke away. The junior Paskowitzes then discovered they had no practical training, no college-qualifying education, no experience with the simplest financial self-preservation.
Recrimination is all the juicier for being held back until "Surfwise's" second half. Early on, the seemingly happy family is seen as media darlings winning myriad surfing competitions in plenty of archival footage.
With so many personalities on tap -- including disapproving relatives and admiring surf-world pros -- it's not surprising that the pic either short-changes or skims over the adult troubles of some siblings. More fully etched is Doc, exasperatingly self-involved yet not incapable of seeing his own errors of judgment; and Juliette, still a free spirit despite her deep maternal instincts. (Even now, neither seems bothered that their loud nightly lovemaking in the camper mortified inches-away kids.)
Somewhat forced happy ending aside, the pic holds together well. The editorial package is sharp. Soundtrack makes use of enjoyably diverse cuts, some by the Paskowitzes themselves -- aspiring rock-stardom being one frequent career path for folks who in some respects remain permanently stalled adolescents.
Camera (color, HDcam), Dave Homcy; editor, Lasse Jarvi; music, John Dragonetti; music supervisor, Janet Billig Rich; sound (Dolby Digital), Kyle Schember. Reviewed at Toronto Film Festival (Real to Reel), Sept. 10, 2007. Running time: 93 MIN.
 


Halfway through Surfwise , a mesmerizingly ambivalent documentary about an itinerant family of Jewish surfer-dude health nuts, we meet the 84-year-old patriarch, "Doc" Paskowitz, at Los Angeles's Museum of Tolerance, showing director Doug Pray a blown-up photo of a Nazi preparing to shoot a Jewish mother and child at close range. "This happened when I was at the top of my powers," says Paskowitz, who, despite declining health, still bursts with physical vitality. "And I didn't do one goddamn thing to help this woman."
The scene feels awkwardly set up, yet also loaded with interpretive potential. Is this a gesture of remorse from a man who's spent his life pursuing physical perfection, based on some cockeyed notion that bodily prowess would have saved the Jews from Adolf Hitler ? Another messianic fantasy from a lifelong narcissist whose first name happens to be Dorian? Or a bit of melodrama staged by Paskowitz, or perhaps urged on him by the filmmakers?
Up until that moment, Surfwise  operates in breezy colorful-geezer mode, offering Paskowitz as an intrepid explorer of an alternative American dream that will vicariously spring us from our nine-to-five doldrums. In the 1950s, after two divorces and a bellyful of respectability in Hawaii , Paskowitz chucked his career as a doctor to hang out with Bedouins in Israel  while teaching the locals how to surf and experimenting with promiscuity. Then he returned to the States, where he informed a beautiful Mexican-Indian woman named Juliette that she would become the mother of his seven sons.
So she did, give or take an annual birth: The Paskowitzes raised eight sons and a daughter—"Doc wanted to repopulate the world with Jews," one son says wryly—while cruising the coasts of America, Mexico, Hawaii, and Israel in a beat-up two-room RV. They lit Shabbat candles every Friday night, fed the kids a strict diet of raw organisms, homeschooled them in the virtues of healthy living and the evils of money and status, and drafted all nine into running the family surf camp.
Surf photographer Dave Homcy 's idyllic wave footage sets off photos of the tanned, smiling children lined up behind their boards. But whether you call this a Rousseau-ian paradise or Capturing the Friedmans by the Sea  will depend on where you stand on hippie living—up to a point. (As the steak-loving daughter of a proselytizing vegan, I'll own up to my own biases.) Without warning, the film takes a sickening sideways lurch as the Paskowitz offspring, still smiling away for the camera, admit that their father beat them when they didn't shape up; that he used his eldest son David as an enforcer; that they had to listen while Doc had nightly sex with his terrifyingly compliant wife, who by her own admission told her daughter, Navah: "Always be grateful when someone will fuck you."
Paskowitz isn't scary just because he's an abusive father, but because he's an absolutist—and, like most absolutists, he's a self-absorbed perfectionist, blind to the differences between himself and anybody else, let alone his own wife and children. It's not hard to see why Israelis were so taken with Paskowitz in his youth: Tanned and muscled, he came across as the alpha-male antithesis of the shtetl Jew and the Holocaust victim, with a body that would have made Leni Riefenstahl  lick her lips. But as a Jew, I find another Jew's obsession with physical perfection and cleanliness ("We all had scrupulously clean assholes," one of the children tells Pray with bitter mirth) profoundly disturbing.
In his mid-eighties, faced with a family riven by conflict and estrangement, Doc Paskowitz has begun to acknowledge the destructive side of attempting to shape his children in his own utopian image: "A real man is capable of controlling himself before he controls his children," he says ruefully.
Surfwise  is a forgiving film, and to Pray's credit, he tries to offer us Paskowitz, the whole man, without judging him or his children. Indeed, it may be a little too forgiving—despite Pray's inclusion of some weak testimony from Doc's siblings, we never learn how Doc himself became such an autocrat, and, as you'd expect from a documentary co-produced by the son of its subject, the film ends with hugs all around. But at a family reunion (arranged by whom?), the genial old gent who still exercises daily can't resist pitting a slim son against his chubbier brother. Today, the kids are mostly functioning remarkably well in a society for which they felt singularly unprepared. But the image I carried away comes earlier, in a long, tight close-up of Doc's eldest son, David, his face contorted as he lip-syncs to a song he composed about impotent rage—a rage that can only be his own.
