         Her debut provocation, 1993's "Boxing Helena," revealed the limits of artistic heredity, and now director Jennifer Lynch -- daughter of David -- has returned with the prankish, ultra-violent hell ride "Surveillance." But, again, her quest to unnerve feels forced.

In Lynch's and co-screenwriter Kent Harper's "Rashomon"-inspired scenario, a series of brutal slayings along a stretch of empty highway draws a pair of dark-suited federal investigators (Bill Pullman and Julia Ormond) to a law enforcement outpost. There they separate three surviving witnesses -- a bloodied and petulant cop (co-writer Harper), a sharp-tongued junkie (Pell James) whose boyfriend was killed and an observant little girl (Ryan Simpkins) who lost her entire family -- in order to piece together what happened. 



         






  Lynch directs her cast for maximum eccentricity, which in Pullman's case feels natural -- he can make any line-reading sound like the mask for a dirty thought -- but in other cast members (Ormond, Harper and French Stewart as a bad cop) edges toward overacting. 

At the end, all is horrifically explained, the body count inflates, yet hardly anything makes sense. In Papa Lynch's films, little is explained, yet because he's so gifted at mining our deepest fears and scariest desires, logic is excused.

"Surveillance," which Dad executive-produced, shows that Jennifer Lynch is not without skill when it comes to solo flurries of outré humor and snap tension. But this lost highway saga has a bend in the road you can see a mile ahead and a turgidly blasé attitude toward carnage (deaths vary from being punch lines to perverse tragedies) that only reinforces the sense that instead of sifting through a nightmare, you're just enduring game pieces being moved around.



   

 It seems doubtful that “Surveillance,” a would-be transgression that tries to squeeze dark laughs from the spectacle of human suffering, would be taking up space in theaters if its director were not the daughter of a name filmmaker. Jennifer Lynch, spawn of David, has made one other feature, a 1993 botch-up titled “Boxing Helena,” about a surgeon who turns the object of his desire into his own Venus de Milo by amputating her healthy legs and arms. In an interview before its release, Ms. Lynch gushed that “obsessive love is like a series of amputations as you steal from one another.”  It’s impossible to know whether Ms. Lynch was having her playful way with the interviewer or not. Whatever the case, to judge from the evidence of both of her features, she remains committed to literalizing this unorthodox view of love, except that now she’s also drenching her (presumed) metaphor in gore. In “Surveillance,” which opens with a scene of a couple being slashed in their bed, she might still be entertaining modest artistic pretensions. But she’s now as in thrall to clever images of death and seeping, gushing, spurting blood as anyone in vivisectionist cinema. Mostly, though, she seems to want to shock you, which, given her father’s brilliant way of drilling your head and body with art, comes off as depressing.  If it seems unfair to compare her with her father, Ms. Lynch, much like Sofia Coppola, makes it easy. Once again, she hasn’t just cast actors, here Bill Pullman and Julia Ormond, who have worked with her father; she has borrowed ideas and visual motifs from his surrealistic storehouse and done her best to imitate his off-beat timing and uneasy humor. Credited as an executive producer, Mr. Lynch even sings the movie’s creepy closing song. It’s hard not to wonder if he helped her with her school projects when she was young, perhaps by making a severed ear out of papier-mâché or dioramas with angry dogs. He has not done her any favors here, however, because all of her images invite unflattering comparison to his.  Mr. Pullman and Ms. Ormond play a pair of unpersuasive F.B.I. agents — their black suits and crazy eyes betray them — who drive into a hicksville to investigate a crime. After some awkward stares and the obligatory Lynchian reference to a good cup of coffee, the agents start interviewing witnesses, including a little girl with the biggest brain in the room. As the story jumps among different versions of what happened — insert obligatory if misleading “Rashomon” reference here — the pace slackens even as the drip, drip, drip of blood turns into a geyser. During the big climax, one killer sexually straddles a victim who’s being strangled to death by a second killer, which indicates that Ms. Lynch’s ideas about obsessive love remain as, um, dicey as ever.  “Surveillance” is rated R. (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.) Sexualized violence mixed in with lots of blood and bits of brain.

In a righteous world, over-the-top, violence-laden shocker "Surveillance" would have gone straight to ancillary, where it might have been discovered and feted by a few cult-fare obsessives as a mildly amusing trifle with one of the genre's dafter plot twists. However, pic's presence at the 2008 Cannes fest cellophanes pic with more class than it deserves, inviting possibly ungenerous thought that it was programmed just because it's helmed by Jennifer Lynch (whose only previous feature was 1993's "Boxing Helena"), daughter of the revered David Lynch. Nevertheless, watch and see if "Surveillance" doesn't end up pretty quickly in the bargain bins.
Action kicks off in an unnamed small burg in the middle of a desert. A couple is attacked in the night by two masked serial killers, who quickly despatch the husband and do something unseen but no doubt nasty to the wife.
Later, FBI agents Elizabeth Anderson (Julia Ormond) and Sam Hallaway (Bill Pullman) ride into town to take over the investigation of a recent mass shooting on the highway, sure that the perpetrators are the same killers they've been stalking. At the police station, the surviving witnesses and various implausibly unprofessional cops are assembled in rooms where the agents' video cameras record the interrogations.
Story switchbacks between the cool-toned present and supersaturated flashbacks as each interviewee, "Rashomon"-style, recalls what they saw. Lying about how he and his dead partner's (French Stewart) own taunting of motorists had a hand in the mayhem, Officer Jack Bennett (Kent Harper, pic's co-writer along with helmer Lynch) tells his version. This differs somewhat from the accounts given by cokehead Bobbi Prescott (Pell James), whose b.f. (Mac Miller) was killed, and little girl Stephanie (Ryan Simpkins), whose whole family was wiped out by the same two masked killers that killed the couple in the pre-credit sequence.
Ludicrously unrealistic details (like the idea that the Violent Femmes' sweary but rousing tune "Add It Up" would be playing on an American radio station, even a college rock one) and hammy overacting (by Harper especially at first, but topped later on by Ormond and Pullman) distract as story plods along, and then goes into an out-of-control tailspin with the twist's revelation.
Helmer's use of creepy sound and stabby little insert shots of creepy stuff recalls her father's work in earlier films, but without being truly unsettling, or even all that scary. Horror fans are likely to guess the twist and feel bored; the more faint-of-heart may simply feel repulsed. And bored.
Tech credits are OK, but nothing special. Locations used are actually in Saskatchewan, Canada.

Jennifer Lynch  has been tarred with the unfounded claim that her films get made only because of who her father is. David Lynch  serves as executive producer of Surveillance , Jennifer's first film since the near-stoning she received after her 1993 debut feature, the amputee fantasia Boxing Helena , and traces of his oeuvre (Lost Highway 's Bill Pullman , FBI agents , corrosive small towns) surface in his daughter's latest. But Dad's influence ends there: Surveillance  is the work of a director who has made significant strides in both storytelling (Lynch shares a writer's credit with Kent Harper , who also acts in the film) and control of the medium, deftly interweaving a grisly thriller, a sicko Rashômon , a switcheroo, a psychotic love story, an imaginative paean to children, and an inspired resurrection of Julia Ormond .
Set in an unnamed flatlands town, Surveillance 's prologue begins in smeary slo-mo, with gruesomely masked killers bludgeoning a man and then pursuing the screaming woman who manages to escape. FBI agents Elizabeth Anderson  (Ormond) and Sam Hallaway  (Pullman) arrive at a podunk police station to investigate a mass slaughter on the highway from the day before, likely connected to the opening's blood and gore. Three witnesses—crazy-fuck cop Jack (Harper), tooted-up Bobbi (Pell James ), and stoic eight-year-old Stephanie (Ryan Simpkins )—recount their version of the roadside atrocities while videotaped, with Agent Hallaway watching the monitors. As each teller's supersaturated flashback unfolds—the recapitulations distorting events to cover up a particular depravity—Lynch heightens the sense of dread with shots of traveling on endless, desolate highways. And then Surveillance  goes batshit.
Beneath the film's surface appeal as a twisty, morbidly funny freak-out lies a weightier theme on the resilience of children. The most reliable of Surveillance 's traumatized witnesses—indeed, the wisest character—is blonde moppet Stephanie, composed beyond her years but never becoming, as frequently happens with pint-size protagonists, precocious or unbearably cute. Lynch has said in interviews that, during the 15-year gap between Boxing Helena  and Surveillance , she got sober, recovered from three spinal surgeries, and raised a daughter, now 13, as a single parent. Whatever her attachment to her own child may be, Lynch displays a deep empathy for Stephanie, who, steadfastly refusing to be undone by the horror she experiences, suggests a kinship with Louie Pollit , the implacable adolescent heroine of Christina Stead 's 1940 novel of domestic terrors, The Man Who Loved Children . As opposed to her father's films, which rarely include anyone younger than the high-schoolers of Twin Peaks  , Surveillance  creates a complex, crayon-wielding underage sleuth, whose powers of observation are keener than those of the adults twice her size.
Towering above Stephanie is Ormond's Agent Anderson, who interrogates the tyke with a creepy, saccharine overidentification: "I was once a sad little girl myself," the femme fed coos with a hand squeeze. But the G-woman is also capable of butch menace, threatening druggie Bobbi with a cavity search in a silly pseudo-sapphic exchange that foretells nuttier same-sexing. Ormond—who once graced a 1995 cover of Vanity Fair ,  which dubbed hers the "face of the future" (essentially killing her career)—throws herself into the role with the abandon of a performer who has nothing left to lose; she's terrific in an over-the-top performance that demands boss-lady steeliness, inner-child woundedness ("It's bringing up a lot  of stuff," she huffs to Hallaway of her Q&A with Stephanie), and id-explosive perversion. As for her director's re-emergence, it looks like it won't be another decade and a half in between projects; Lynch's third film, Hisss,  about a lethal snake woman, is, according to IMDb , in post-production. While her father may have abandoned filmmaking to extol transcendental meditation, Jennifer appears committed to continuing the noble tradition of blowing—not calming—our minds.
