 The small, arid no man's land in which the last third of Eran Riklis's tightly wound film, "The Syrian Bride," unfolds is between checkpoints at the Israeli and Syrian borders. This bleak area is tiny enough to allow people on either side to converse by bullhorn.  Here is where the Salmans, a family from Majdal Shams, a Druze village in the Syrian Golan Heights, annexed by Israel, finds itself embroiled in a bureaucratic nightmare. Because Syria does not recognize Israel, the Druze in the Golan Heights are cut off from Syria.  The Salmans have traveled to the border to bid goodbye to Mona (Clara Khoury), the youngest of two daughters, who is leaving home to wed a cousin, Tallel (Derar Sliman), a Syrian television star she has never met, in an arranged marriage. Once she crosses the border into Syria, she can never return.  Grim and unsmiling in her white wedding dress, the bride-to-be is determined to take her chances. The wedding photographer who trails after her capturing her every move on a video camera tries to make light of her anxiety: "Marriage is like a watermelon," he says. "You don't know what it's like until you open it up."  The monkey wrench thrown into the family's plans involves the stamping of her passport. Because Syria and Israel have no diplomatic relations, travelers with Israeli-stamped passports cannot enter Syria, which still considers the Golan Heights part of Syria. Neither of the officials at the checkpoints - a sympathetic Israeli who throws up his hands, and a bored Syrian who would rather watch television than deal with the crisis - will break the deadlock.  As Jeanne (Julie-Anne Roth), the Red Cross-affiliated intermediary who helped arrange the crossing, dashes back and forth trying to untangle the mess, phone calls to higher authorities in Jerusalem and Damascus go unanswered.  "The Syrian Bride" is not the first movie in which impenetrable borders become the symbol for all that's wrong in the Middle East. The recent documentary "Checkpoint," filmed at various blocked roads in the West Bank, revealed pervasive confusion, lack of communication and explosive frustration.  The no man's land in which the Salmans wait with mounting anger looms as the ultimate metaphor for stalemate and indecision. The impasse comes at an especially sensitive moment: the succession of Bashar al-Assad to the presidency of Syria after the death of his father has prompted demonstrations and raised border tensions. The film uses the situation to evoke a sense of the absurd, sometimes with dry, deadpan humor. At times it recalls Danis Tanovic's 2001 film, "No Man's Land," in which two wounded soldiers, one Bosnian, the other Serbian, confront each other in a trench between battle lines.  The idea of a no man's land also extends to the strained relations among the members of the Salman family. Mona's two brothers have returned for the wedding, each toting political and psychological baggage. Hattem (Eyad Sheety), the older brother, betrayed his father's code of tribal loyalty by leaving home eight years earlier to marry a Russian doctor (Evelyne Kaplun). The family patriarch, Hammed (Makram J. Khoury), a political militant under Israeli scrutiny, can hardly bring himself to look at his son.  Hammed is forbidden to accompany his daughter to the border, but he goes anyway, risking arrest. The younger brother, Marwan (Ashraf Barhoum), is a handsome, womanizing wheeler-dealer who lives in Italy and is involved in a shady import-export business.  Observing the family turmoil is Mona's married older sister, Amal (Hiam Abbas), an independent minded woman with two teenage daughters. She is unhappily married to Amin (Adnan Trabshi), a traditionalist who chafes at her independence. When he learns she has just been accepted at Haifa University to study social work, he protests that it will be a stain on his manhood.  Notwithstanding the movie's complex politics, the Salmans could be any family gathered for a ceremonial occasion. The excellent ensemble provides a finely shaded group portrait of the clan whose internal tensions are exacerbated by politics. The movie's final moments suggest that only a brave leap into the unknown can begin to untangle the mess.
The latest in what has been a surprising two-year run of provocative features made in and around Israel , The Syrian Bride  is a tale of혰what else?혰tribal loyalties that is, above all else, an ensemble piece.
An extended Druze family, divided by the Israeli-Syrian border, holds a wedding that, before it brings anyone together, exposes nearly every fissure in the neighborhood as well as in their not exactly Muslim clan. There's also the irrational harshness of the law. Not only is the marriage arranged, but once the bride (Clara Khoury ) crosses into Syria  with her new husband (a sitcom star she has only seen on television), she will never be permitted to return to Israel.
Directed by veteran Israeli filmmaker Eran Riklis  from a script he co-wrote with Palestinian TV journalist Suha Arraf , The Syrian Bride  was shot on location in the majority Druze town of Majdal Shams, occupied by Israel since 1967, and set on the day that Bashar al-Assad  succeeded his father as ruler of Syria. The situation is fraught. Israeli authorities worry about unrest in the Golan. The father of the bride (Makram J. Khoury , the real-life father of the "bride") is a pro-Syrian activist out on parole and eager to demonstrate. Her brother has violated tribal taboo by marrying a Russian.
The Israelis ban the father, the father bans his estranged son혰although the older sister, who is having her own problems with her traditional husband, manages to get them all to the zone between the borders. (Palestinian actress Hiam Abbass , most recently seen here as a terrorist's mother in Paradise Now , projects her customary regal intensity in the role.) Riklis and Arraf compound this extreme situation with a series of nightmarish bureaucratic hassles and, courtesy of the U.N. , some desperately ineffectual shuttle diplomacy.
The Syrian Bride  has no particular visual style, but it exudes affection, for its characters and their culture as well as the unprepossessing beauty of the scrubby terrain that holds them in thrall. Like all wedding films, it's essentially a comedy, albeit a sad one. In the key image, the bride is left alone to wait in no-man's-land혰the embodiment of forlorn hope and a powerful image of a Sabbath that may never arrive.
