 Late into “Take” comes a teasing suggestion that much of what we’ve seen thus far has been imagined, to some extent, in the minds of its ill-fated characters. Subjective or not, the movie is a bore and an eyesore. If there is anything the cinema needed less than another angst-ridden, cross-cutting tragedy about crime, fate, memory and redemption, it’s the kind  shot in an ugly monochromatic palette suggesting a world drained of emotions and filmmakers parched of imagination.  Written and directed by Charles Oliver, “Take” stars Minnie Driver as Ana, a working-class mom with a hyperactive child (Bobby Coleman), and Jeremy Renner as Saul, a compulsive gambler at the end of his rope. We glean, from an early jumble of images that foretells much brooding montage to come,  that their crossing of paths results in a terrible act of violence.  Bits and pieces of the story merge and splinter, compelled less by the psychological fissures of the characters than by a screenplay that wails with emotionalism but fails to generate any real feeling. Saul passes his final hours on death row in the company of a priest who drones clichés, while Ana motors along a memory-strewn desert en route to his execution: two tortured souls fated for one last encounter. And one torturous drama put out of its misery.  “Take” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). There is violent child endangerment and torture of the audience.

Take  sketchily crisscrosses narrative strands involving a man on death row and the working-class mother whose life he has ravaged. Taking outlandish delight in the nature of the focal crime, director Charles Oliver  follows Ana (Minnie Driver ) as she drives to the prison facility where Saul (Jeremy Renner ) will receive a lethal injection. When he can no longer disguise from the audience that Ana's little boy is a goner, now only a projection of the woman's mirror-infused reality, Oliver gets his sick rocks off by teasing the audience with how the special-ed-bound Jesse (Bobby Coleman ) bit the bullet on the fateful day he and Mommy were inside a supermarket when Saul pulled a gun on the store's customers. Tricked out with bizarre fuzzy-wuzzy point-of-view shots, a tinkly soundtrack, overly considered compositions that foreground oddball acts of human behavior, and screechy literalizations of psychological trauma and healing (behold as Ana leaves her baggage behind in the final shot), Take  has the audacity to excuse its bad cinematic habits as figments of both Saul and Ana's imaginations. Oliver wants to defend restorative justice, but his interest in this form of victim-offender mediation registers only as an afterthought—unelaborated and presented solely as a means of dodging criticism.
