 Correction Appended  The strange and delightful "Talent Given Us" is a movie that shouldn't work but does rather remarkably. Directed, written and shot by Andrew Wagner, the film hinges on a retired late-middle-aged couple, Allen and Judith, who spontaneously decide to drive from New York to Los Angeles to visit their son, Andrew. The couple's adult daughters, Maggie and Emily, go along for the ride and for much of the journey squawk in the back seat like unruly teenagers. That's no surprise because Maggie and Emily actually are Allen and Judith's daughters, their real-life daughters.  And the guy behind the camera? The one dogging the couple while they shop at the Fairway Market, pad around their large Upper West Side apartment and swap a litany of minor complaints? The guy who silently rides shotgun in the family van during this uncommon road movie, who records Maggie and Emily's intimate hotel-room conversations and shoots a tentative, tender love scene between Allen and Judith with the camera all but jostling for space on the bed? That's Allen and Judith's son, the one meant to be in Los Angeles, the director Andrew Wagner.  Set at the crossroads of real life and make-believe, "The Talent Given Us" features people who may be playing fictional versions of themselves, or not. So is it live or is it Memorex? Does it matter? Fiction films routinely borrow tropes from documentaries, including hand-held camerawork, artless (naturalistic) performances and soundtracks without the usual musical cues. Every so often a documentary does the same, and the upshot is fiction films that look like documentaries, and documentaries that play like fiction. Indeed, in films by Christopher Guest (the fictional "Best in Show") and Errol Morris (the documentary "The Thin Blue Line") such genre ambiguity comes across as organic, as part of a larger drift toward hybridization in which orchestrated reality television isn't an oxymoron.  Although such blurring between fiction and nonfiction may seem new, with "The Talent Given Us," Mr. Wagner is following in the footsteps of such dissimilar filmmakers as Andy Warhol, who excelled at genre ambiguity, and Jim McBride, whose 1967 fiction film "David Holzman's Diary" centers on a man who puts himself in front of a camera because, as Jean-Luc Godard said, cinema is truth 24 times a second. Putting aside the inconvenient fact that video is not film (Mr. Wagner shot his movie with a digital-video camera) there remains the larger, thornier question of whether the truth exists before you start shooting with any camera, a question that doesn't become easier once you press the start button.  One of the pleasures of "The Talent Given Us" is that it provokes such intellectual noodling. Are Allen and Judith playing themselves or are they riffing on their own personas? Are these on-screen characters less flattering versions of the real Allen and Judith or are they more idealized? Certainly the on-screen Allen and Judith come across as engagingly if at times maddeningly real, like people you know (like parents, like you). Judith relishes doing the New York Times crossword puzzle, though she regularly leans on Allen to fill in the blanks. Allen, in turn, shambles around the Upper West Side much like every other older middle-aged white man shambling about that neighborhood, a man as at ease in his own skin as he is in this cloistered pocket.  A lot happens in "The Talent Given Us," even if it sometimes feels as if nothing is happening at all. Emily, a hilariously archetypal actress, regales her captive audience with squirmingly personal details about her sex life, her psychotherapy and her plans for plastic surgery. Maggie drives the van under the judgmental gaze of her father, a scene that plays true to the everyday power struggles not only between children and parents, but also between men and women. State lines are crossed, and stomach-turning fast food is consumed. Road movies are movies of revelation, and as the miles rack up, old wounds are opened and dug into with gusto. Then a beautiful, buxom interloper enters the fray and makes everything that much more complicated (and funny).  In time, the travelers reach Los Angeles, that emerald city at the end of the asphalt road. By then, the questions about truth versus fiction that swirled throughout "The Talent Given Us" have receded into the background, replaced by flesh-and-blood characters as richly conceived as those in any novel.  Indeed, there is a distinct Philip Roth cast to Allen, a man who, in spite of the sordid revelations about his past behavior, retains a core dignity and mystery. And, yes, Allen and Judith do catch up with their son, our director. Andrew Wagner is only on screen for a brief spell, but of course he's been there all along - blowing kisses and raspberries in what turns out to be a very sly valentine to an amazing family.
Many a struggling indie filmmaker has turned to his family for help. But writer-director Andrew Wagner , embarking on his first feature after a shelf-ful of unproduced screenplays, asked for something considerably more complicated than a financial infusion—for his pseudo-confessional road movie The Talent Given Us , he wanted his mother Judy, father Allen, and sisters Emily  and Maggie to play themselves. The results are mortifying—which is exactly as Wagner intended.
Seamlessly solipsistic and basically a glorified home movie, The Talent Given Us  is this year's Tarnation . It's also a Sundance film through and through, a less bleak Capturing the Friedmans  with the familiar arc of countless dysfunctional domestic comedies. But Wagner's anti-vanity project, despite the self-congratulatory vigor with which it makes a show of picking at family scabs, also possesses a curious integrity—this raw, fascinating, often unpleasant film is not in the least coy about its queasy mix of exploitation and therapeutic exhibitionism.
A stunt premised on the unembarrassed supply of too much information, The Talent Given Us  is blessed, if that's the right word, with almost shockingly unselfconscious performances: Wagner's sisters are both professional actors, but his parents are not. Judy, eager and volatile, seems like a natural; more surprisingly, so is lumbering, slightly speech-impaired Allen—at least to the extent that he has a real skill for ignoring the camera. They tackle the specter of late-life regret with gusto, excavating the desires and resentments underlying a marriage that, while comfortable in its rituals, has ossified from years of neglect. Sis Emily has seemingly been appointed the movie's safeguard against sappiness—playing herself as a morbidly narcissistic sub-Hollywood  creature with a litany of bodily and New Age fixations and a habit of expressing them in almost Tourette-ish gushes. Emily's self-help shtick becomes less funny when it's clear that Wagner wants in on it too. The Talent Given Us  climaxes with a gentle reminder that "the fulfillment that you are looking for is right here." That this line is spoken by the real-life Bruce Joel Rubin  in his real-life meditation class is perhaps the film's best joke.
