
Romantic comedy about a homegrown Romeo and Juliet from warring pizza families, one specializing in crust and the other in sauce, "A Tale of Two Pizzas" barely stretches to 82 minutes. Vincent Sassone's freshman feature boasts a gossamer-thin premise, some enjoyable neighborhood perfs, rather cramped "real" Yonkers locations, cutely animated caricatures, and the presence of de-criminalized "Sopranos" regulars Vincent Pastore and Frank Vincent as the dueling clans' imposing patresfamilias. Skedded to open Oct. 7 at Gotham's AMC Empire, pic's modesty of intention matches its paucity of ingredients. In scope, depth, rhythm and gags, "Pizzas" seems best suited to the small screen.
Assured cast puts plot through its predictable twists with laudable aplomb. Though straying little from their familiar personae, Pastore and Vincent bring immediate conviction to the pie-mad patriarchs, while Angela Pietropinto and ever-quirky Patti D'Arbanville add spice. Even the central couple acquits itself with a minimum of self-conscious archness, the duo's animated selves sometimes taking over in deft, inventive visual shorthand. Still, crust vs. sauce seems a pedestrian, sitcom-like hook to hang a theatrical feature on, and auds might do better having this one delivered.
Camera (color, HD-to-35mm), Peter Nelson; editor, Robert Pennington; music, Peter Fish; animation, Jeff Drew. Reviewed on DVD, New York, Sept. 29, 2005. Running time: 82 MIN.
 


A Tale of Two Pizzas  stars two talented actors from The Sopranos  , but the similarities to the greatest serialized drama of our time end there. Vincent "Big Pussy" Pastore  and Frank "Phil Leotardo " Vincent play Vito and Frank, rival pizza makers fighting a war of attrition for the hearts and minds of Yonkers . While the old generation battles to decide whose pizza is superior, their children do their best Romeo and Juliet impersonation, falling in love against the wishes of their respective fathers. Alas, a plague on both their houses would seem to be in order. Writer-director Vincent Sassone makes your mouth water with his lovingly photographed images of freshly baked pizza but turns your stomach with extra-cheesy dialogue and an inconsistent narrative (at various times, Vito's wife and his mentor, Yonkers's aging pizzalogist, both receive credit for the same sauce recipe). During one of the many songs that overpower the dialogue in the sound mix, a singer croons, "This is the best I can do," and we sense that the composer understands this innocuous but forgettable picture very well.
