
Family life veers into the surreal

György Pálfi's "Taxidermia" is a brilliant, often grotesquely bizarre allegory on life in Hungary from World War II to the present, a surrealist fantasy exploring the limits of the body and its desires and altogether a darkly funny comedy on the human condition in extremis. It is permeated with that highly developed Eastern European sense of absurd but is not for the faint of heart: There's much that is exuberantly gross, including some sexual imagery, but there are also images of startling beauty -- and horror. (In the film's most poignant sequence, Pálfi evokes the eternal cycle of life with only an old wooden bathtub as a prop -- a place for lovemaking, baptism, the laying out of a corpse, etc.) 

Pálfi focuses on three generations. A grandfather (Csaba Czene), an orderly at a remote World War II military outpost, is consumed with sexual frustration and a longing for love. The orderly's son (Gergely  Trócsányi) -- the product of the orderly's tryst with his nitpicking lieutenant's fat wife --  grows up to be a bulky speed-eating contestant at the height of the Communist era. The grandson (Marc Bischoff) is a scrawny, unhandsome taxidermist who cares for his now immobile father (Gábor Máté) who has proudly become surely the fattest man in the world.

 With a horrific power that goes beyond Italian horrormeister Dario Argento at his most inspired -- and perhaps even David Cronenberg -- Pálfi gradually reveals the grandson's inexorable passion to create the most perfect work of art ever, an act that is as grotesque as it is oddly redemptive. Indeed, Pálfi leaves us with the sense that he strikes the right note in regard to Hungary's past decades of hardship and oppression, yet he also suggests that the artist's essence is ultimately elusive, literally buried deep within himself.

-- Kevin Thomas  
 "Taxidermia."
 MPAA rating: Unrated. Running time: 1 hour, 31 minutes. In Magyar and Russian, with English subtitles. At the Nuart in West L.A. through Thursday.

 Among the grotesque images paraded through Gyorgy Palfi’s film “Taxidermia,” the most indelible  are neither the graphic depiction of an obsessive voyeur masturbating with fire nor the shearing of a pig’s tail attached to a newborn baby. They are found in its extended scenes of sport-eating competitions by a Hungarian team of gourmands during the Communist era.  Seated in a row of troughs, the contestants, who have the pillowy bodies of sumo wrestlers, shovel slop down their throats as fast as they can swallow it in a race against the clock. During the breaks between rounds they regurgitate torrents of vomit, while comparing techniques of “cross-swallowing.” If Nora Ephron’s “Julie & Julia” is an irresistible invitation to dine, “Taxidermia” is an equally compelling one to fast.  A meditation on the bestial appetites of humanity by the Hungarian director who made his 2002 debut with the much-admired, nearly silent “Hukkle,” “Taxidermia” relentlessly focuses on sex, food and innards. It might also be an allegory about repression and Hungarian national identity over the last 70 years. Beautifully lighted, with elegant, fluid cinematography, it includes some stunning, magic-realist flourishes.  The revolving image of a wooden bathtub finds its function changing with each revolution. A stuffed human body with the head removed and a stitched torso, exhibited in a museum, suggests a Dadaist parody of Michelangelo’s David.  “Taxidermia” belongs to a school of Central European surrealism that marries nightmarish horror with formal beauty. Two masters of a style that is visually spellbinding but that can be physically nauseating to behold are the Czech animator Jan Svankmajer and the Russian painter Pavel Tchelitchew.  Directors who borrow from the aesthetic include David Cronenberg and Terry Gilliam, and, in its cruder expressions, the practitioners of torture porn. But Mr. Palfi’s film aspires to high art. In his director’s note he states, “My aim was to create not just an auteur film but an enduring, personal auteur film.” He might have added “in the European tradition.” The message is a brutal reminder that beneath a thin veneer of civilization we are animals who kill and torture one another and who devour other animals.  “Taxidermia” is a generational triptych that begins during World War II and ends in the present and whose parts dissolve into one another. The first two are adapted from stories by the Hungarian writer Lajos Parti Nagy; Mr. Palfi contributed the final segment.  In Part 1 Vendel Morosgovanyi (Csaba Czene), a servile military orderly and peeping Tom in a remote wintry outpost, obsessively spies on the wife and daughters of his sadistic commanding officer, who treats him like a slave. Vendel finds comfort in secret lust. He tortures himself with a candle flame, drinks fire and in a spectacular special effect turns his erect penis into a flaming rocket.  After he copulates with the lieutenant’s slovenly wife in a scene in which squeals and grunts are accompanied by his fantasies of her daughters and a slaughtered pig, she becomes pregnant.  The cuckolded commander shoots Vendel in the head but brings up his child, Kalman Balatony (Gergo Trocsanyi). Born with a pig’s tail that is severed at birth, Kalman grows up to be a speed eater for a team seeking recognition by the International Olympic Committee. The eating marathons and accompanying military pageantry mercilessly satirize the empty pomp of Communist rallies. Kalman marries Gizi (Adel Stanczel), a fellow speed eater. After their honeymoon, while she is pregnant, the couple put on an eating exhibition in which they consume much of a vat of red caviar.  The story jumps to the present. Gizi has left Kalman (now played by Gabor Mate in a fat suit), who subsists on a diet of unwrapped candy bars that he swallows whole; he has grown so enormous he is unable to move. Kalman, who lives alone with three glowering cats that he is fattening by feeding them lumps of lard, is regularly visited by his resentful son, Lajos (Marc Bischoff), a sallow, cadaverous taxidermist.  Discovering his father dead one day, Lajos proceeds to stuff him. Then he locks himself into a Rube Goldberg-worthy contraption and begins stuffing himself; father and son end up as works of art displayed in a museum.  Treatises could be written on the relation between life and art, the bestial and spiritual, in “Taxidermia.” A central ingredient that runs through the movie is a current of humor. “Just as the body is overcome by desire, so naturalism is overcome by surrealism,” Mr. Palfi declares. Barely able to contain a smirk, “Taxidermia” makes it grimly funny.

"Taxidermia" sets a benchmark for body horror in the cinema. Helmer Gyorgy Palfi's follow-up to the startlingly original "Hukkle," this widescreen exercise in the confrontational continues his fascination with the mysteries of nature but substitutes an oddly skewed sense of wonder with a full-frontal sensory assault. Story of a series of Magyar men who carry a ghastly gene or eight across three generations is fascinated with the logistics of biology and mortality but has little to say beyond its jaw-dropping special effects. Stomach-churner is a natural for midnight fest slots but much more problematic for theatrical distribution.
In a lonely outpost, scrawny, hair-lipped orderly Vendel (Csaba Czene) responds to the constant browbeating of his superior, Hadnagy (Istvan Gyuricza), by spying on people and masturbating.
Following a bout of grotesque sex with Hadnagy's corpulent wife (Piroska Molnar) -- which includes at least one explicit shot of coupled genitalia -- Vendel's head is blown off by the enraged cuckold. In due course, a baby is born that appears perfect, save a squiggly tail which is promptly snipped off.
Fast forward to the product of this unholy union, champion Olympic speed-eater Kalman Balatony (Gergo Trocsanyi). First seen competing at a '50s-style Soviet event, he is smitten with the equally hefty Gizi (Adel Stanczel, made up to look like John Waters' late muse, Divine).
At about the hour mark, the story leaps ahead again to their now-grown child, gaunt taxidermist Lajos (Marc Bischoff). who spends most of his time caring for his now-massive father (Gabor Mate, swaddled in a fat suit). Lajos is raising three abnormally large housecats in a large cage. When one mutant feline mauls Kalman offscreen, Lajos lovingly practices his profession.
In broad terms, part one is an explicit exercise in Central European ultra-miserabilism, middle seg is ghastly funny on par with anything the Monty Pythons dreamed up, and the climax one-ups David Cronenberg's worst nightmare. Yet the total is much less than the sum of its, uh, parts. Rather, the pic is more like a bigscreen equivalent of children pulling wings off live flies.
Tech credits are impressive on what looks to have been an expansive budget. Script won a screenwriting prize at the Sundance lab.
Camera (color, widescreen), Gergely Poharnok; editor, Reka Lemhenyi; music, Amon Tobin; production designer, Adrien Asztalos; costume designer, Julia Patkos; sound (stereo), Tamas Zanyi. Reviewed at Hungarian Film Week (competing), Budapest, Feb. 4, 2006. Running time: 92 MIN.
 

