 The message about race relations in America conveyed by "The Tenants," a small, serious, but choppy and psychologically cauterized screen adaptation of Bernard Malamud's  1971 novel, is dire. In the novel, set in a soon-to-be-demolished Brooklyn tenement, two writers, one white and Jewish and the other black, struggle to be friends but fail to bridge the racial and ethnic divide.  The drama pits Harry Lesser (Dylan McDermott), a solitary author struggling to complete his third novel, against Willie Spearmint, a k a Bill Spear (Snoop Dogg), an unpublished African-American writer pounding out the latest draft of a work that's part fiction, part memoir.  Harry is the lone tenant holding out in a crumbling building whose landlord, Levenspiel (Seymour Cassel), keeps pestering him to leave, upping his buyout offer each time he visits. But Harry adamantly refuses to move until he finishes his novel. The phrase "until I finish my book" becomes a mordant comic leitmotif  illuminating the film's subtheme, the obsessive self-absorption of writers. Eventually, Harry loses the woman he wants to marry because he insists on finishing his book before doing anything else.  Willie, a part-time squatter in the desolate graffiti-scarred building where Harry is the last legal tenant, has appropriated a vacated apartment as his makeshift office. When not working there, he stays on and off with his white, Jewish girlfriend, Irene (Rose Byrne).  The two men meet when Harry, hearing the distant clack of a typewriter, investigates, discovers Willie at work and introduces himself. Before long, Willie pays Harry a call and warily asks him to read and evaluate his manuscript. Convinced that Willie means it when he demands an honest, no-holds-barred appraisal, Harry offers strong praise tempered with thoughtful criticism.  His negative words, though mild, drive Willie into a rage that unleashes a torrent of racial and ethnic abuse to which Harry refuses to respond. The gist of it is that Harry can't grasp Willie's writing because blacks and whites are fundamentally different.  When Willie's anger subsides, he returns for further advice and invites Harry into his mostly black social orbit, at which point the movie abruptly throws sex into the volatile mix. Once it does, a conflict already fraught with allegorical resonance slips over the line from semirealism into the theoretical.  Harry is seduced at a party by the black girlfriend of one of Willie's pals, inflaming the simmering racial distrust between the friends and nearly resulting in Harry's being beaten up. Shortly afterward, Harry announces to Irene that he has fallen in love with her and wants to marry her, and the two become lovers. She tells him her relationship with Willie is already on the skids and asks Harry to let her break the news that it's over, but he foolishly jumps the gun and does it himself.  The screenplay by David Diamond hardly bothers to lay the psychological groundwork for Harry's romantic choices. As portrayed by Mr. McDermott in a beard, the character seems weirdly obtuse in some ways and not in others, and the contradictions make no sense.  When hammered with Willie's inflammatory epithets, Harry, decent liberal that he is, refuses to take the bait and chooses his words carefully. But presented without rhyme or reason or emotional preparation, his relationships with women come across as theoretical constructions.  In its casting and direction (by Danny Green), "The Tenants" nervously sidesteps the black-Jewish issue by giving neither Harry nor Irene nor the overtly racist Levenspiel any recognizably Jewish characteristics; they don't even have Brooklyn accents. Because the movie is too scared to delve deeply into deeper issues of racial and ethnic envy and sexual stereotyping, only one side is heard: Willie's.  Where the movie does succeed is in insinuating the notion that mutual fear and hatred between  blacks and whites (and especially between blacks and Jews) are bone deep, potentially murderous and essentially unfixable.  Snoop Dogg, seizing his opportunity, inhabits the mind and heart of his anguished, fuming character with an electrifying conviction.  After making the first move to peel away poisonous layers of hate and suspicion, Willie is held back by his peers and ultimately co-opted and betrayed by the one man who held out the faint possibility of resolution. Even art is just another tool for leverage in a continuing power struggle.  "The Tenants" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity, racial epithets, violence and sexual situations.

Glum filmization of Bernard Malamud's 1972 novel about race relations between two writers --- one white, one black -- in an abandoned Brooklyn tenement, keeps grimly glued to its one-note premise, relieved by nary a glimmer of humor, surprise or personality. First-time helmer Danny Green veers between "Shining"-type evocations of hermetic madness (complete with axe) and bald, '70s-specific agitprop. But the obsessive aspect is tediously sealed off (hirsute writer at typewriter), while the socio-political context is perfunctory (black men alternately dancing and glowering). Pic, preeming at Gotham's Empire 25 Cinema, is likely to face imminent eviction.
Harry Lesser (Dylan McDermott) holes up in his rent-controlled apartment, the last holdout in a decaying tenement building which its owner (Seymour Cassel) cannot sell until Harry voluntarily moves out. A creature of habit, Lesser feels driven to finish his novel in the place he started it. 
One day he discovers Willie Spearmint (Snoop Dogg), a fellow scribe, squatting in a room down the hall. Soon a precarious apprenticeship develops between published writer Harry and self-taught Willie, one fraught with mutual distrust and continually teetering between respect and contempt. Tensions escalate, particularly when Irene Bell (Rose Byrne), who styles herself as "Willie's white girl," enters the picture.
Unfortunately, the stylization just about sums up Byrne's Irene, scripter David Diamond having gifted her with vague 'tude rather than personality, and with Aussie thesp Byrne failing to fill in the blanks. 
In contrast, Niki Crawford as a sexy black temptress infuses consciousness and individuality into a minor part.
Still, the filmmakers have not fleshed out the main characters beyond McDermott as an ivory tower-dwelling introvert and Dogg as an angry black man. 
Sporting a full beard, McDermott, tries to burrow into his character neurotic isolation. Ultimately, though, his sullen self-absorption becomes just plain boring. 
Snoop Dogg fares better, his semi-inarticulate frustration suggesting layers of emotion that never quite reach the surface. Together, McDermott and Snoop Dogg's scenes, if not particularly mesmerizing, resonate with emotion, charting a progression that feels almost like a story. Yet the madness that finally locks them into violent one-upmanship seems artificial, with helmer Green's vision too genteelly literary to indulge in effectively freewheeling horror.
Any credibility the characters manage to build instantly disappears, however, once they leave the deserted building for the city outside which, inexplicably, looks almost equally depopulated. The outside scenes come across as even more emptily abstract and theoretical than the characters' unseen typewritten manuscripts. 
Tech credits are staidly professional.

Faithful film adaptations of literary works are as rare as compelling movies about writers and writing, but here's one that gets both right. Based on Bernard Malamud 's 1971 novel of the same name, Danny Green 's The Tenants  is a bleakly funny, quietly harrowing exploration of the confluence of race, art, and privilege in pre-gentrification Brooklyn .
Essentially a two-character parable, The Tenants ' story couldn't be more elemental: Harry Lesser  (Dylan McDermott ), a moody writer, isolates himself in an otherwise vacant tenement to finish his latest novel. His progress is interrupted when Willie Spearmint  (Snoop Dogg ), a petty criminal intent on becoming a writer himself, sets up an office down the hall. Their brief, instantly volatile association underscores the gulf between black and white America in the early '70s and beyond: Confrontational, race-obsessed Willie alternately antagonizes and flatters Harry, while the arrogant Harry patronizes Willie even as he co-opts his talent, his experience, and ultimately, his woman (Rose Byrne ). A satisfactory middle ground remains tragically elusive. Stilted and gloomy as it sounds (and sometimes is), The Tenants  gets by on its nimble approximation of Malamud's robust prose, subtle turns of deadpan humor and gut-tingling menace, and remarkable performances. McDermott does credible work here, but Snoop's casting is a stroke of genius: His sneering, wounded belligerence and disarming lack of affect make the character more than just a hapless doppelg and give the film's potentially dry politicking a human dimension.
Malamud claimed that The Tenants  "argues for the invention of choices to outwit tragedy," and the ambiguous last line of Lesser's novel, revealed in the film's acerbic final shot, could be a disastrously deferred expression of such a choice or just one more solipsistic ego-stroke. In either case, the disturbing implication Green leaves us with is that art is simply another stage on which to exhibit our worst instincts.
