 Andy Warhol asked to photograph the seat of his leather pants. Robert Mapplethorpe invited him to Fire Island. Tom of Finland drew his portrait. Sal Mineo took him to bed. He has been called the "Greta Garbo of porn" and "a full body genital." Denizens of Berlin, Paris, New York and San Francisco during the 1970's might remember spotting him on the street or lingering in doorways, a pulse-pounding vision in leather, floppy blond hair and ultrawhite skintight jeans. Who could forget?  One of the enduring icons of gay male eroticism, the phenomenon known as Peter Berlin is explored, explained, ogled and interviewed in the superb documentary "That Man: Peter Berlin." Self-made and endlessly self-obsessed, Mr. Berlin was the reluctant star of the gay pornographic classics "Nights in Black Leather" and "That Boy," but his true métier was the super-sexualized lifestyle as a perpetual work of performance art.  He was a photographer of some originality but only one subject, himself. Hundreds of outré self-portraits decorate the San Francisco apartment where Mr. Berlin still lives (still wearing those crazy outfits) and sat for a series of revealing and articulate interviews. The director, Jim Tushinski, couldn't have asked for a more colorful or brazenly documented subject, nor one who proves more unexpectedly endearing. Vivid reminiscences from John Waters, Armistead Maupin, the pornographic auteur Wakefield Poole and the artist Robert Richards elevate "That Man: Peter Berlin" into a minor classic of demimonde hagiography.

"That Man: Peter Berlin" reps a workable, if slightly reticent docu portrait of the titular '70s pin-up and porn star, once famous for his bobbed hair and a protuberant crotch John Waters describes here as the gay equivalent of Jayne Mansfield's bust in "The Girl Can't Help It." Pic offers standard mix of digitally shot interview material with the elusive main subject himself, with archive footage and talking heads to assess Berlin's impact on gay culture. Already skedded to tour several gay fests, film could find nostalgic out auds in select burgs saying, "Hello, Berlin." 
Likened by some here to Greta Garbo for his stand-offish manner when famous, and later withdrawal from the spotlight, German-born Berlin, now a well-preserved if impoverished sixtysomething, recollects his life for Tushinski's camera. Something of a riches-to-rags story, aristo Berlin is seen making his name in pre-Aids San Francisco and beyond via distinctive photographic self-portraits, modelling for artists Tom of Finland and Robert Mapplethorpe, and starring in such films as "Nights in Black Leather" and "That Boy." Some auds may bemoan what lay beneath Berlin's tight trousers is hardly seen. Tech package will do.
Camera (color, DigiBeta projection), Tushinski, Jochen Labriola, Peter Berlin; editor, Tushinski, Clarence Reinhart; music, Jack Curtis Dubowsky. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama), Feb. 15, 2005. Running time: 80 MIN.

 


Skintight white pants made Peter Berlin 's legs look marble—and if the '70s gay/porn/gay-porn icon's pronounced cock lost an inch or five he would easily pass for the auto-David docmaker Jim Tushinski  thinks he is. Before we agree (and we do), Tushinski must spin Berlin 's self-portrait photography and well-documented peacocking as more than predictable narcissism. He has help from Robert W. Richards , who defends Berlin as "very vain, but at the same time, very human in his vanity"; John Waters  says Berlin didn't turn him on but he liked "looking at him"; industry contemporaries explain how Berlin's films emphasized seduction and levity and subversion, while his use of Brechtian nonevents earned him Warhol comparisons. As a sex artist, Berlin was both consummate and consummating—clear enough. But as the Germany-to-Frisco transplant whose real name is Armin von Hoyningen-Huene , Berlin had his afflictions. "To be loved and wanted"—that's Berlin's reason for Berlin. His love of seduction found a match in a fear of love itself (obviously); also, all his friends died from "the virus." But these aren't tragedies, and Berlin's no hero, just an inspiration. Tushinski smartly sticks to encomium. "You think these pants make my ass look fat?" Berlin, now in his sixties, says to the camera. He asks because he knows they don't.
