
Actor-comedian Paul Reiser has mostly kept a low profile since ''Mad About You," his Emmy-winning NBC comedy with Helen Hunt, went off the air in 1999, having overstayed its welcome after seven seasons.
''The Thing About My Folks" plays like a Very Special Episode of the long-running sitcom, grinding along for a grating 96 minutes. It's the flabby story of a father and son who heal their prickly relationship during a road trip they embark on, well, merely to heal their prickly relationship.
Reiser, who wrote the script, plays Ben, a neurotic and perpetually flustered New York writer, who is also a married father of two. (Every character Reiser plays is neurotic and perpetually flustered.) One night, his father, Sam (the usually reliable Peter Falk in extreme overacting mode) arrives unexpectedly at his door and eventually reveals that his wife of 47 years, Muriel (Olympia Dukakis, unseen until the late innings), has left him. Little wonder -- Sam is an abrasive, gas-passing boor who has always taken his long-suffering wife for granted. ''She just had enough," Sam says, and soon the audience will understand exactly how Muriel feels.
For reasons too pointless to explain, Ben and Sam wind up on the road to discovery, a favorite destination for fathers and sons in the movies. It's as if the dissolution of his parents' marriage is simply a setup for Ben getting to know Sam better. (The journey takes place in a gorgeous 1936 convertible Ford Deluxe, easily the best thing in the film.) The road map, more or less, is a decades-old letter Ben shares with his father. It was written, but never given, to Sam by Muriel, who details all the reasons why, even then, she wanted to leave her inattentive husband.
As Sam denies he's a creep, he and his son set off on various rote adventures -- a fishing trip, a minor-league baseball game, tequila shots with women with fake blond hair and ample cleavage, and a pool game that ends with Sam beating up some young loudmouth. Meanwhile, the task of tracking down on-the-lam Mom is left to Ben's wife, Rachel (a wasted Elizabeth Perkins), and his trio of squabbling sisters.
Along the way, Reiser, who still believes third-rate shtick passes for sophisticated comedy, never troubles himself with a single unpredictable moment. Son discovers he's more like Dad than he initially realized, Dad proves he's really a big old softie, though frankly, he's an absolute pest. And let's not forget the inevitable catastrophic disease and/or death plotline calmly awaiting its cue off-camera.
Blandly directed by Raymond De Felitta, ''The Thing About My Folks" means well. It's a family comedy-drama that wants to pluck the heartstrings but keeps getting tangled in its own tinny sentiment. Flat and forgettable, it's a tiresome film barely held together by its plinky piano score, sophomoric flatulence jokes, and cloying greeting-card emotions.


         Sweet but dramatically inert, "The Thing About My Folks" is writer-star Paul Reiser's seriocomic valentine to his parents. While stocked with simple, earnest observations on love, relationships and family, the film's haphazard plotting and often discordant tone keep it from being anything more than an episodic collection of sentimental aphorisms.
 
  In a lot of ways, the movie feels like an underdeveloped, overly long episode of Reiser's TV series "Mad About You," with Elizabeth Perkins stepping in for Helen Hunt and Peter Falk replacing Louis Zorich as Reiser's father. The writing here is not as sharp as it was in the show. In the movie, Reiser plays Ben Kleinman, a New York magazine writer with a wife and two kids, who plans to buy a farmhouse upstate. One evening, his father, Sam, nonchalantly shows up with shocking news: Ben's mother has unexpectedly taken off. At the suggestion of his wife, Rachel (Perkins), Ben takes the old man on a day trip to look at real estate. It quickly becomes an extended road trip.
 


         






    Ever since his character expressed a lack of comfort with the word "nuance" in the 1982 film "Diner," Reiser has presented a particular brand of comic apprehension. In films such as "Beverly Hills Cop" and "Aliens" he always played the guy with an imminent anxiety attack following him like a black cloud. With "Mad About You," which he co-created, the unease continued but was usurped by a desire to comment on the modern urbanist condition. His humorous books, "Couplehood" and "Babyhood," were bestsellers, but here he reins in the comedy, leaving the film's emotions to carry a weight they cannot bear.
 
  Reiser and Falk have good chemistry and are believable as father and son, but there's a grating quality to their arguments. At times there's so much yelling the film might have been called "Mad at You." Their scenes together become far more effective as Ben starts to see Sam as a man who did the best he could rather than as a father who was rarely home.
 
  As they share experiences they missed — attending a ballgame, going fishing — the men gradually find some peace with each other. Falk is initially a little broad but settles down to deliver some wonderfully sly moments, as when he hustles a game of pool in a bar or laments the emptiness of dancing with a woman other than his wife for the first time in 40 years. Those moments, however, are tarnished by the decision to include a running gag about Sam's flatulence. Did the MPAA recently mandate that all PG-13 comedies must contain fart jokes?
 
  The movie's female characters — Rachel, Ben's sisters (Ann Dowd, Claire Beckman and Mimi Lieber) and Muriel, the runaway mom (an eleventh-hour appearance by Olympia Dukakis) — are on the sidelines for most of the film, linked primarily by awkwardly staged phone calls that primarily serve to provide exposition. Given that one of the film's main themes is how little Sam and Ben understand women, there's something tautological about the ladies being given such short shrift.
 
  Some nice images the region's plentiful leaves changing colors — are mainly wasted. Director Raymond De Felitta ("Two Family House") seems less assured here than when working with his own material, and the film clearly speaks in Reiser's voice.   

You can't fake love, the primary ingredient in The Thing About My Folks , a Paul Reiser-penned attempt at intergenerational rapprochement. Unfortunately, you also can't hide gooey self-justification, no matter how hard you try. Thing is Woody Allen on a third-grade reading level. Neurosis abounds, but awareness doesn't, and certain ''jokes'' demand additional therapy: Any movie that casually equates ''a freshly bathed baby'' with ''my father's balls'' cries out for another round on the couch. My Father's Balls  would have made a more appropriate title, actually: This is a father-and-son (Peter Falk and Reiser) road picture, the kind that builds to a big, inevitable ''I'm sorry.'' Seems Mom (Olympia Dukakis) has mysteriously left Dad after more than 40 fairly ordinary years together, and sonny boy is inclined to pin the blame on pops. But the story, much like the marriage, isn't about Mom: It's about men not so much tackling responsibility as passing it off laterally, and finally pulling an end run into the schmaltz zone.


Good-natured but only memorable as a platform for the amusingly feisty Peter Falk, "The Thing About My Folks" plies a light approach to the problems grown children face when their parents appear on the verge of divorce. A project that's been close to actor-writer Paul Reiser for more than a decade, pic plays at the level of solid cable productions, even with a game cast. And, outside of some domestic fest appearances, cable is where this comedy-drama is headed.
Popping by unannounced one night at the home of son Ben (Reiser) and wife Rachel (Elizabeth Perkins), Sam (Falk) drops a bomb in the form of a scribbled goodbye note from Muriel (Olympia Dukakis), his wife of many years. Ben and his worry-wart sisters leap into action, trying to track Muriel down, while Ben tries to distract Sam by inviting him on a road trip to look a farm for sale in upstate New York.
Reiser and Falk work in tandem with fine ease -- perhaps too much ease for all the buried pain and feelings that surface during their quality time together away from the city. Sam is immediately likable when filtered through Falk's patented manner of crusty puzzlement and amusing anger and irreverence, but underneath is a father figure who was so intent on running his business that he neglected his wife and kids. As in countless American plays and movies about families, resentments are aired and father-son psyches are bared, in between the laughs.
Pic belongs more to Reiser than to director Raymond De Felitta, who allows the extremely talky script to go on uncut and covers the chatter with an excess of TV-style tracking close-ups.
Dukakis appears only near the end, for fairly melodramatic effect. While it's pleasant to see Falk and Reiser with a ton of screen time, the talented Perkins is sadly kept on the story's margins. Vid lensing looks good, but vid projection at Palm Springs fest was sub-par.

Paul Reiser  claims he wrote The Thing About My Folks  to honor his favorite actor, Peter Falk . It's a noble goal, but surely there are better ways to celebrate the man's work than by sticking him in an embarrassingly unfunny film and asking him to deliver three fart jokes, two piss jokes, and a pool cue to the groin. Falk plays Sam Kleinman , who takes an impromptu road trip with son Ben (Reiser) after his wife of 47 years suddenly leaves him. Screenwriter Reiser proposes that a lifetime of neglect can be corrected by a well-selected greeting card: an appropriate message for a film that asks us to slog through 75 turgid minutes for a moving final act. Falk isn't given anything funny to say or do, but his performance is littered with beautiful touches, tiny oases of brilliance in an entertainment desert. Still, as quickly as they arrive, perfect moments like Sam's first drag off a cigarette in years are immediately ruined by Reiser, needless bar fights, and Tim McGraw  singing "I like it, I love it, I want some more of it." Wrong on all three counts.
