 Utah boasts 12 Republicans for every Democrat, mainly  because of its  large number of Mormons. So when Utah Valley State College in Orem  announced, just weeks before the 2004 election, the engagement of the fiercely liberal director Michael Moore to speak on campus, all hell broke loose - quite literally, in the view of the more outraged locals. But for  Steven Greenstreet, a 25-year-old former  Brigham Young University student,   the impending visit was an opportunity to chronicle one of the most virulent culture wars in recent Utah history.  Raw, chaotic and engagingly eager, "This Divided State" juxtaposes candid interviews with scenes of unrest as Mr. Greenstreet rushes gamely from one hot spot to another. Within days of the college's announcement,   town  and gown have  erupted with anti-Moore petitions, public hearings, threatened lawsuits and gleeful editorials in the  press. The student body president, Jim Bassi, and his vice president, Joe Vogel, are the target of vicious phone calls and hate mail, and a protest that begins by cloaking itself in a debate over Mr. Moore's $40,000 fee soon reveals its good-versus-evil subtext.  Spearheading the opposition is the local businessman and community advocate Kay Anderson, who offers the college $25,000 to cancel Mr. Moore's visit. "Free speech works because most of us know when to keep our mouths shut," rails Mr. Anderson, whose tortured logic enlivens much of the film. These spurts of unintentional humor are filmmaking gold, as when an anti-Moore student petitioner, Sean Vreeland, earnestly likens Utah's religious fervor to that of the Middle East. And though occasional moments of silliness intrude - rather too much time is spent in the company of Ken Brown, a Republican student who likes to flaunt his physical and sartorial resemblances to Mr. Moore - the film never descends to ridicule.  Many scenes are, in fact, extremely moving. Commenting on the furor,  William Sederburg,  the school's president,   admits to being overcome by emotion. "It almost feels like a college campus," he says, looking mildly astonished.  A Togolese exchange student explains what it's like to live in a country where freedom of speech is unknown. Most compelling of all are the Mormons who patiently stress that the practice of their  faith relies on tolerance and open-mindedness.  "This Divided State" may ring with death threats and heave with animosity, but its final message is a hopeful one: in one of the most conservative states in the country, there are at least as many open minds as closed ones.
As more than one interviewee in This Divided State  points out, Mormons혰who need receptive audiences for their mission work혰should be temperamentally suited to listen to others. But when Michael Moore  was invited to give an October 2004 speech at Utah Valley State College , the response was anything but welcoming. Bowing to protests at the lack of balance혰in a county where Republicans outnumber Democrats 12 to one혰the student government quickly scheduled Sean Hannity  to speak one week earlier. Local millionaire Kay Anderson  offered $25,000 to buy back all tickets for Moore's event, rejecting his appearance as "disrespectful" to community values. One college administrator notes that the protesters who've complained to him have not seen Fahrenheit 9/11 ; Anderson's wife eventually rents it for her husband from the censoring video chain CleanFlix. Directed by a Mormon-raised BYU dropout with sympathies for both sides, This Divided State  develops into a lively but simpleminded valentine to liberal tolerance. Sad to say, similar ideological battles erupt on blue-state campuses, from controversies over what should be taught in Middle Eastern studies departments to the public immolation of Larry Summers . It would be nice to report that Moore comes across as more erudite than Hannity in his speech, but both men behave like what a Mormon might hesitate to call assholes.
