
In 2003, Sebastian Telfair was an 11th grader and the biggest star on New York City's public basketball courts. Like most popular high school basketball players, Telfair had a fan club, but few people in the history of high school ball had Jay-Z, Ahmad Rashad, and Derek Jeter perched on the sidelines of their games. Telfair did, and he jolted them out of their seats with his electric shot-making. Coach Rick Pitino personally tried to woo Telfair to come play Division 1 ball for him at the University of Louisville, but he could see the writing on the wall: the NBA was hot for Telfair, too.
Jonathan Hock's documentary "Through the Fire" trails Telfair for the year he weighed his options. The film has the trappings typically associated with a must-have basketball prospect. Telfair lives with his siblings and single mother in a Coney Island housing project. He wants to move his family somewhere safer, and the NBA is a compelling express route. But what Hock's film finds is much richer and more resonant than the average exit-from-the-ghetto tale.
For starters, Telfair isn't the first kid in his family to get near the NBA draft. His brother Jamel Thomas, who spent four years playing for Providence College, was burned in 1999. What seemed to be a sure thing wasn't, and Jamel, seduced and essentially abandoned, went off to play in European leagues. The news broke his mother's heart. And it couldn't have been easy for anybody in that household to know that Jamel and Sebastian's cousin, Knicks star Stephon Marbury, had been drafted as a college freshman in 1996.
Sebastian's fortunes seem to be déjà vu all over again. "Through the Fire" follows a young man being lured by the NBA, and quietly captures his transformation as he sails into the corporate marketplace on an endorsement deal. Doubters worry that if Telfair doesn't head to Louisville, he'll be ill-prepared for professional basketball. More than once we hear that he's too short (5 feet 10 inches or 6 feet, depending on which skeptic you ask) and that his shooting is streaky.
The movie is wonderfully attuned to revealing Sebastian and his family as developed characters. Hock clearly likes Telfair, in part for the same reasons that we do: He has a killer smile, and he loves his momma. But he's not a momma's boy. Telfair's miked during some games, and throughout one contest you could fill a dumpster with the trash he talks. At the McDonald's
 All-American Game, he calls his fellow All-Americans country boys and, during the main event, cajoles players to pass him the ball so he can hand it off to a scorer -- with enough assists he could break a record. Hilariously, he's praised for his selflessness after the game.
Telfair's brazen antics are tinged with burgeoning materialism, and because Hock's aim is a kind of objectivity, he doesn't use commentary from the player's family and friends about his evolution, although his brother Daniel Turner and his coach seem to be just as preoccupied with success' trimmings. But it's hard to blame Telfair for letting his celebrity go to his head. If I were on the cover of Sports Illustrated in the 12th grade, there'd be no living with me either.
Since the NBA drafted Darryl Dawkins and Bill Willoughby in the 1970s, it has always fretted about whether high school kids belong among its elite. The second-guessing began again in 1995 with the drafting of Kevin Garnett: There's no proven farm system in the NBA to groom the players; it sends a bad message about the value of a college education. The association recently set the minimum age at 19. But this is a social dilemma as much as it is a sports-entertainment problem.
What we see in "Through the Fire" is what we see in urban neighborhoods all over the country. Basketball transcends the merely recreational. It's a vocation for a lot of young men and women that, given the low odds of professional success, seems like a dream that crushes far more spirits than it lifts. But the stakes for a prodigy like Telfair seem unfairly high. College? Or a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to raise a family out of poverty? It's sad, but Rick Pitino will probably lose every time.
.

 In the course of his senior year at Coney Island's Lincoln High School, the basketball sensation Sebastian Telfair will have to choose between the University of Louisville or the uncertainty of the N.B.A. draft. Jonathan Hock's unwaveringly upbeat documentary "Through the Fire" is a record of that year, a sponsor-friendly profile (the film is produced by ESPN Original Entertainment) of an 18-year-old on whose shoulders rest the hopes of nine siblings and an exhausted mother. With nearly unlimited access to games, practice sessions, coaches and family members, Mr. Hock shows us a smart and frighteningly level-headed young man as he negotiates perhaps the most critical crossroads of his life.  Yet as Sebastian overcomes injury and a fickle press to make the cover of Sports Illustrated and shop for a dreamed-of Rolex, it becomes clear that the benefits of a college education pale when compared  with multimillion-dollar endorsement deals and escape from the violence of the projects. Behind the cheering and popping flashbulbs of "Through the Fire" lurks another, much darker movie, one that questions the relationship between sneaker manufacturers and financially deprived kids with exceptional talent.  "I'm not used to being around people who have jobs," says Sebastian at one point, but the beaming Adidas executives at the announcement of his endorsement contract already know that. If he were, "Through the Fire" might never have been made.

Jonathan Hock's docu jettisons ethical quandaries about the questionable relationship between corporate-funded sports and kids from the projects in favor of a heroic, suspense-filled story that plays like well-structured fiction. With a real-life athlete as talented and charismatic as Coney Island hoop prodigy Sebastian Telfair, almost any outcome would probably have made for good drama, but Hock lucked out when life provided a happy ending. Upbeat Urbanworld documentary prizewinner, full of strong personalities and crisply edited court action, could score well in sports venues.
Since sixth grade, Telfair qualified as a legend in his basketball-obsessed neighborhood. Now in his senior year of high school, scouts follow his games, sportswriters analyze his every move, and Jay-Z and Spike Lee are frequently in the stands watching.
Telfair calls a well-attended press conference to announce his choice of university (Louisville), and when his high school team wins the championship for the third straight year, speculation is rife as to whether he will join the ranks of young players drafted by the NBA straight out of high school.
No sooner does Telfair answer that question, opting to try for pro ball (helped along by the stick-and-carrotcoincidence of a fatal shooting where he lives and the offer of a multi-million dollar sneaker contract), than the press begins to turn against him, emphasizing his spotty shooting record and under-6' height.
The suspense then shifts: Will he be drafted by the NBA or will he wind up like his talented, older brother, passed over after a stellar college season, and now playing professional ball in Greece?
Helmer Hock, whose credits include the ESPN skein "Streetball" and the Imax "Michael Jordan to the Max," sticks like glue to Telfair. Sebastian's coach and brothers provide running commentary on his career while lenser Alistair Christopher's HD camera trains on Telfair as he ducks, bobs, weaves, passes and dunks his way through crucial, nail-biting championship games and attempts to prove his worth as a team player.
Extensive media coverage of developments in the unfolding saga neatly colors pic's exposition. But more than anything else, Hock's job is expedited by Telfair himself -- the kid's clean-cut looks and million-dollar smile clearly as relevant as his athletic prowess in winning him his lucrative sneaker contract, his front-page spread in "Sports Illustrated" and even his effortless domination of the screen.
Having had years to fully accept his talents and assume responsibility for parlaying his gifts into a better future for his family, Telfair appears serenely conscious of all the forces at play. Extremely media savvy (his cousin is Knicks star Stephon Marbury), Telfair seems capable of taking the hoopla in stride.
Given his subject's supreme self-confidence, Hock's up-close-and-personal approach is relentlessly forward-driven and leaves no room for questioning anything beyond the unfair arbitrariness of a fickle system that rewards one brother with millions and another with exile to Greece.
Tech credits are polished.

A riveting doc of hoop dreams realized, Through the Fire  follows Coney Island  legend (and current Portland Trail Blazer ) Sebastian Telfair  through his final high school season, focusing on his decision to skip college and go pro. An ESPN  production (scheduled to air on March 12), it's slickly shot and structured like a Bruckheimer sports weepie, but director Jonathan Hock  also shows the image-production of Telfair as star. Living in the projects, Telfair sees his cousin Stephon Marbury  hit it rich in the NBA, while his brother Jamel Thomas , a starter at Providence , is left undrafted and has to join a European league to pay the bills. Jamel takes every precaution to ensure Sebastian's success on and off the court, coaching him to convey a "Tiger Woods " image, clean and smiling. Media and player are mutually manipulated—Telfair puts up a front, Sports Illustrated  gets its cover boy, and the sneaker contract gets signed. Various other mentors want a piece: his vociferous coach Tiny, Louisville  coach Rick Pitino , Adidas  execs, his oldest brother Daniel—even Jay-Z  shows him some love. Despite all the distractions, Sebastian remains committed to basketball, as the reams of eye-popping game footage attest. The kid's got a sick hesitation move. Jumper's still spotty, though.
