 A cramped metropolis of xenophobes and eccentrics living in a futuristic present: that is the image evoked in “Tokyo!,” a compendium of three surreal shorts whose relationship with one another might best be defined by the exclamation point in the title.  Two of the three are by French filmmakers: the New York-based Michel Gondry (“Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind”) and Léos Carax (“The Lovers on the Bridge”). The third and weakest contribution comes from Bong Joon-ho, the South Korean director of “The Host.” Both in its parts and in the sum of them “Tokyo!” is playfully and sometimes disorientingly apocalyptic. Opposite in spirit to the sensuous, humane “Paris Je T’Aime,” another recent directorial group portrait of a city, “Tokyo!” conjures alienation and dehumanization  In Mr. Gondry’s “Interior Design,” the most warm-blooded of the three, the relationship of Akira (Ryo Kase), an aspiring young filmmaker with delusions of grandeur, and his insecure, tag-along girlfriend, Hiroko (Ayako Fujitani), is tested as they scour the grotesque low end of Tokyo’s real estate market in search of an affordable rental. One hole-in-the-wall they visit is bug infested; in another they recoil at the sight of a dead cat on the floor. A third is a tiny pod with a porthole.  Because Hiroko doesn’t “do” anything in a society that identifies people by occupational labels, her shaky self-esteem crumbles in the cold, cruel city. In a witty cinematographic coup she undergoes a Kafkaesque metamorphosis and finds a strangely happy resolution, which Mr. Gondry engineers gracefully, with minimal special effects.  Akira, I should add, is no great shakes as a filmmaker. His idiotic contribution to the future of cinema, which he tests out at a screening of his no-budget opus, “The Garden of Degradation,” is to bring a smoke machine into the theater, which produces watery eyes and coughing fits among the invited guests.  The title  of Mr. Carax’s film is a French expletive that is also the name  of its main character, a subterranean half-human played with enthusiastic comic zeal by the director’s usual lead actor, Denis Lavant. With a white marble eye and a curling red beard, the green-suited “creature from the sewers,” as he is nicknamed by the media, speaks a nonsensical patois that only his mysterious French lawyer can understand. After popping out of a manhole, he begins wreaking havoc on the sidewalks of Tokyo, grabbing fistfuls of money and flowers from pedestrians’ hands and stuffing them into his mouth as he lurches down the street.  On his second trip above ground, he becomes a full-fledged terrorist who creates mass panic as he casually tosses grenades over his shoulder while staggering along. Soon his lair is raided, and he is dragged off in shackles and tried for murder.  On one level Mr. Carax’s film is a “Godzilla” spoof. But with its conspicuous references to World War II atrocities by Japanese soldiers in China, memorialized in underground graffiti, the movie is also a critique of Japan’s suppressed historical memory. Denial of the past, it implies, can keep those horrors buried for only so long before they explode in a volcanic rampage.  The protagonist of Mr. Bong’s “Shaking Tokyo” is also a loner, a so-called hikikomori, or shut-in (Teruyuki Kagawa), who has lived indoors for 10 years with minimal human contact. His hermetic existence abruptly ends when the delivery of his daily pizza coincides with an earthquake, and he connects long enough with the beautiful young woman who delivered it to fall in love with her. Roused from his isolation by passion, he ventures outdoors to find her.  As in Mr. Carax’s film it takes momentous forces erupting from underground to restore a semblance of reality and human connection in a city living inside a chilly science-fiction bubble.

Two Frenchmen and a South Korean make a great deal of mischief in "Tokyo!," an uneven but enjoyable trio of films that take affectionate (and sometimes literal) aim at the Japanese capital. Fittingly enough, horror and sci-fi rep the primary building blocks of these Tokyo stories, though the ingredients aren't always doled out in the proportions one would expect from filmmakers Michel Gondry, Leos Carax and Bong Joon-ho. Their names should secure the witty omnibus a place on the shelves of cinephiles and genre buffs after a solid fest life and limited theatrical release through Liberation Entertainment.
Like a nastier Eastern sibling to "Paris, je t'aime," "Tokyo!" reps a playfully ragged attempt to capture (and skewer) the multiple shifting identities of its eponymous city.
First and arguably best of the bunch is Gondry's deviously titled "Interior Design," which opens on a dark and stormy night as young, self-deluded aspiring filmmaker Akira (Ryo Kase) and his supportive but directionless g.f. Hiroko (Ayako Fujitani) arrive in Tokyo. Hiroko's attempts to find them an apartment (experiencing firsthand the surreal horrors of low-end Tokyo real estate) leads only to frustration, as does her search for a job.
Akira says early on that people define themselves by what they do, a maxim that takes on startling new meaning when Hiroko undergoes a bizarre but not entirely unwelcome transformation. Gondry handles the light intrusion of Cronenbergian body-horror with minimal f/x and old-fashioned visual sleight-of-hand, keeping his camera focused on Fujitani's engaging performance. The Gallic helmer may have a reputation for dazzling directorial whimsy, but his restraint pays off here in a work at once poignant and slyly Kafka-esque.
Less subtle in moniker and execution, monster-movie parody "Merde" may prove the most intriguing offering to viewers, as it's Carax's first film since 1999's "Pola X." Taking a page from "Godzilla" and its countless cine-spawn (and perhaps paying tribute to fellow helmer Bong's "The Host"), Carax unleashes a hideous, Gollum-like humanoid (a freakishly made-up Denis Lavant) from the sewers onto the cosmopolitan streets of Tokyo.
After wreaking some mild havoc (followed by some explosive references to Nanking that crystallize the pic's return-of-the-repressed subtext), the creature is captured and interrogated by the authorities, his guttural ravings decipherable only by an eccentric French attorney (Jean-Francois Balmer, having a ball). Merde, as this terrorist calls himself, baldly indicts the people of Japan as "disgusting" (a bit rich, given the source), though the ending suggests future cities are ripe for harassment.
Engaging any number of satirical targets, from the amusing politesse of Japanese news anchors to the culture's willingness to turn anything and everything into a mass-marketed phenomenon, "Merde" is the collection's roughest-looking and most thematically barbed effort -- which makes the beguiling simplicity of Bong's "Shaking Tokyo" all the more welcome.
Teruyuki Kagawa (also appearing in Un Certain Regard selection "Tokyo Sonata")  plays a self-described hikikomori
, or shut-in, who hasn't left his apartment in more than a decade. It takes a visit by a beautiful pizza delivery girl (Yu Aoi) and a random earthquake to lure the hermit out of his cave, whereupon he finds he's not the only agoraphobe in town.
Deploying smooth, supple camera movements that capture the flat's warmly lit and impeccably maintained interiors, as well as wider establishing shots of the city, Bong and d.p. Jun Fukumoto effortlessly pinpoint the sense of isolation that so often permeates even the world's most densely populated metropolitan centers. Mild sci-fi inflections aside, "Shaking Tokyo" finds one of South Korea's most creative talents working in a delicate minor key. Some viewers may want more Bong for their buck, but it's a lovely sorbet with which to end a piquant three-course meal. 
This review was updated on May 21, 2008.



Does anyone remember Japan ? The tri-part Tokyo! revisits the Land of the Lost Decade—or at least its largest city—courtesy of tourist filmmakers Michel Gondry  and Leos Carax , plus South Korean neighbor Bong Joon-Ho . Mutants abound as each episode trips the light fantastic. Gondry's opening "Interior Design" is a vaguely Jarmuschian hipster entertainment about an aspiring filmmaker and his slacker girlfriend, who arrive in Tokyo and immediately succumb to the inexplicable hassles of metropolitan life—with the girlfriend making the more radical adaptation.
"Interior Design" evokes Gondry's pet distinction between animate and inanimate in Japanese terms; "Merde," the first Carax film of the 21st century, is a more confrontational riff on the most celebrated of Japanese monsters. Carax regular Denis Lavant  emerges from a Tokyo manhole—barefoot and green-clad, with one milky eye and a crooked red beard—and, accompanied by a pastiche of Akira Ifukube 's Gojira score, staggers through the garish yet orderly Ginza, grabbing, eating, smoking, and licking, alarming pedestrians (when they're not documenting his antics on their cell phones). Dubbed the "Creature From the Sewer" by deadpan newsreaders who link him to al-Qaeda , Aum Shinrikyo , and Siberian witchcraft, this chaotic eruption is shown to embody Japan's historical repressed as well as Europe's guilty conscience. The creature discovers a subterranean memorial to the Heroes of Nanking  and launches an even more destructive attack; captured and put on trial, he's defended by a French lawyer with a matching milky eye who translates the creature's squeaky-voice nattering about his god.
As much a form of performance art as a movie, "Merde" offers the funniest urban rampage since Bong's The Host. Bong's own "Shaking Tokyo" is a quieter monster movie that addresses hikikomori , a specifically Japanese form of agoraphobia in which a young person retreats into his or her room, sometimes for years. A love story (possibly involving a robot), it's the anthology's least flashy filmmaking, but the truest to its location—lugubrious, a bit sentimental, and hopeful that Japan will again emerge from its shell.
