 Correction Appended  A delicate wisp of a film with a surprisingly sharp sting, "Tony Takitani" tells the story of a lonely man who at age 37 awakens to life for the first time during a brief idyll. The film was directed by Jun Ichikawa, who has adapted this Haruki Murakami short story of the same title with grace and fidelity. Short on incident and narrated in the third person with serene detachment, the original story was published in The New Yorker three years ago and, at least on first reading, would seem impossible to transpose to the screen.  Like the short story, the film begins before the birth of its title character. Three years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Tony (Issey Ogata) is born to a jazz musician and a woman whose health isn't strong enough to withstand the birth of her only child. Between the death of his mother and his father's benign neglect, Tony grows up in profound isolation, a state he will not notice until he falls in love. In the film, the woman, Eiko (Rie Miyazawa), floats into his life as if from a dream, and it's in a dream state that Tony comes alive. The couple date, marry and together build an almost perfect life that is marred, ever so slightly, by the wife's passion for clothes.  "In Milan and Paris she went from boutique to boutique, morning to night, like one possessed," Mr. Murakami writes. "Instead of the Duomo or the Louvre, they saw Valentino, Missoni, Saint Laurent, Givenchy, Ferragamo, Armani, Cerruti, Gianfranco Ferré." Mr. Ichikawa translates this orgy of consumerism into an elegant montage of her shopping, the camera often fixed on her feet in their spiky heels, whimsical flats and a questionable pair of ankle boots. The year is 1985, and Japan is in the midst of the economic boom that will turn it into an economic superpower. Tony earns plenty of money, but Eiko's obsession gnaws at him. One day, he asks if she could spend a little less, a request that leads to disaster.  It would be unfair to burden "Tony Takitani," in either its written or its filmed form, with too much political weight. That said, Mr. Murakami has Tony's parents marry in 1947, the same year that Japan adopted its constitution (and pacifism) and Gen. Douglas A. MacArthur gutted the country's left wing by squelching a planned general strike. The image of Tony that emerges in adulthood, hunched over his worktable as he painstakingly draws machines, a job for which we are told he is well suited, dovetails with the stereotype of postwar Japan as a country of money and conformity, not of art and individuality. It's a stereotype that the story and the film at once acknowledge and obliterate.  "Loneliness is like a prison," says the film's narrator, with a voice like a caress. Early in the film, Tony's father lies in a Chinese jail cell; decades later, his son curls into the same position in an empty room in his house. Tony's cell may be self-constructed - he reaches out only to Eiko - but the prison in which that cell sits was not built by him alone. Mr. Ichikawa's insistence on Tony's historical context may even be behind the steady left-to-right camera movements the director uses throughout the film: before the occupation, Japanese was written right to left (and up and down), which is the same direction that traditional horizontal scrolls are viewed. It's no wonder Tony often seems headed in the wrong direction.  It's worth noting that Mr. Murakami's story echoes, if only in broad strokes, Gogol's "Overcoat," another short story about another lonely man, Akakii Akakievich, who falls under the spell of a love that tragically ushers him into the world. Gogol's hero dies alone; Mr. Murakami's simply ends up alone. Mr. Ichikawa, however, ends his film with the image of Tony Takitani staring at a photograph and thinking about someone other than himself. How you read this image will depend on whether you like your glass half full or half empty. Mr. Murakami, at least by evidence of this one story, seems to like his glass more empty than not. Mr. Ichikawa appears more hopeful and more than willing to pass the glass around.
In the parallel worlds of Japanese writer Haruki Murakami , the magic happens between the lines. His spartan lyricism, rendered in deceptively plain and airy prose, tends to shade without warning into deep, dizzying melancholy. It's hard to fully grasp the chemistry of this process, and presumably harder still to transpose it to another medium. Last year's Complicité stage production of The Elephant Vanishes  was a triumph of outside-the-box adaptation that didn't so much capture as intensify the Murakami mood (its brash poignancy, if anything, recalled the novelist's more demonstrative cinematic cousin, Wong Kar-wai ). Not counting a few stray shorts, film versions of Murakami have been non- existent (apparently he doesn't permit them). For this rare attempt, director Jun Ichikawa  smartly opts for a distilled minimalism, starting with his choice of source material: a mere wisp of a short story called "Tony Takitani" (which first appeared in English in The New Yorker  three years ago).
Both protagonist and story are barely there, but "Takitani" is Murakami in miniature, a brief, precise inventory of the novelist's themes: cosmic loneliness, the shadow of mortality, jazz, the coincidence of materialist abundance and spiritual barrenness. Ichikawa retains a portion of the text as voice-over. Given a Western name by his trombonist father (the suggestion of an American friend and the cause of some hostility in post-war Japan ), the title character also inherits, as if by genetics, a lifelong burden of solitude. Growing up motherless and self-sufficient, he becomes an illustrator, specializing in meticulous sketches of machines. In early middle age, Tony (Issey Ogata ) falls for and marries the much younger Eiko (Rie Miyazawa ). Notwithstanding her expensive couture habit—before long, her racks of designer wear have taken over an entire room—the newlyweds enjoy a companionable relationship, until Eiko's bid to restrain her shopaholic tendencies results in a fatal accident.
This union, an idyll so fleeting and so alien to everything Tony had known as to be almost illusory, neatly bisects the film. Before Eiko, Tony fails to recognize how alone he is; after her death, he's forced to confront the possibility that loneliness may be his natural condition. (Ogata is a remarkably versatile stage actor who played the Japanese business associate in Edward Yang 's Yi Yi   and Emperor Hirohito  in Alexander Sokurov 's The Sun , and his performance here is wondrously subtle.) Tony first attempts to fill the void by hiring a secretary (also played by Miyazawa) with identical measurements as Eiko to wear her outfits while on the job. Soon enough, he changes his mind and disposes of her wardrobe—in the most haunting shot, Tony lies alone in her dressing room, empty and seeming now like his mausoleum (it echoes an earlier shot of his father, also played by Ogata, in a Chinese prison cell in the 1940s).
Shot in a wan, neutral palette that emphasizes its protagonist's muted desolation, Ichikawa's film is, in more ways than one, a model of economy: The elder Takitani's Shanghai  stint is conveyed in a series of sepia stills; most of the interiors utilize a single, repeatedly re-dressed set. Languid, left-to-right tracking shots, one image wiping into the next, give the impression of a picture book's slowly turned pages. Ryuichi Sakamoto 's spare, insinuating piano score conjures an atmosphere of dreamlike suspension, as does the low-key voice-over, which at times trails off, only to be picked up by the characters. Oneiric as it is, though, Tony Takitani   conveys a powerfully tangible sense of loss and loneliness. In both concrete and existential terms, it's a film that dwells on what the dead leave behind and how the living carry on.
