Alan Ball is the kind of artist who favors dialogue so darkly clever and terse you can just about breathe in the dead air that surrounds each line. Having written the screenplay for American Beauty   and created HBO's Six Feet Under   and True Blood  , Ball has now written and directed Towelhead , based on a 2005 novel by Alicia Erian. The movie tries to put us inside the head of Jasira (Summer Bishil), a 13-year-old Arab-American Lolita who lives in a tract house on an arid suburban Houston cul-de-sac that looks just like the one in E.T.  Jasira's fussy, stern father (Peter Macdissi) is a proudly assimilated Lebanese who  nevertheless rages away at what he sees as the prejudices and permissiveness of the West. He'll do anything to protect his daughter,   but he has no idea of the daily torments and temptations she actually faces. There are the kids who pelt her with racial epithets, the buxom models in skin magazines that are the very first images to turn her on, and the squinty-eyed redneck-patriot neighbor (Aaron Eckhart) who fondles her, then tries to go further. The film presents these situations in a state of hiply detached curiosity that's meant to mirror Jasira's alienation from her own body (or something). Yet as it becomes clear that Ball, in essence, has just restaged American Beauty  with a socially conscious paint job, the sensationalism of Towelhead  looks more and more like a dramatic tic. B–

 It is hardly news that teenage sexuality is a subject that drives many people crazy. But how crazy? In “Towelhead,” a provocative satire of a culture that is paradoxically hypersexual and puritanical, it makes everyone bonkers. The men tend to be glowering beasts unable to keep their hands to themselves, and the female characters are either angry, judgmental watchdogs or witchy Lolitas not fully aware of their Circean powers.  The movie, faithfully adapted from Alicia Erian’s novel, is the first film  directed by Alan  Ball, the creator of “Six Feet Under” (and of the new vampire series “True Blood”),  and screenwriter of “American Beauty.” Set during the first gulf war,  in a spanking-new, upscale housing development on the outskirts of Houston, “Towelhead” is a crude but scathing portrait of suburban life.  In its preoccupations it might be described as “Son of ‘American Beauty.’ ”  If that first movie was a glum but polished man of the world, its offspring is a colicky baby who does a lot of screaming and yelling and banging of fists. Instead of the lush, well-tended landscape of “American Beauty,” the sterile tract housing of “Towelhead” is harshly ugly. The screenplay is talkier, and the acting more strident.  Mr. Ball can’t resist indulging in the kind of titillation that the movie deplores. Although “Towelhead” doesn’t actually show female-genital shaving, the insertion of tampons and the putting on of condoms, it goes right to the brink before the camera cuts away. It does, however, show menstrual blood, masturbation and discarded condoms. More to the point, its characters, no matter what their age, obsess about such things to the exclusion of everything else.  The misanthropy  of “Towelhead” is almost as uncontrolled as the male characters’ libidos. Even though Mr. Ball tries to humanize the men by showing their capacity for an awkward tenderness, the movie’s underlying attitude is that all men are dogs, especially when faced with virginal teenage flesh. Although the women are more sketchily drawn, with the exception of Toni Collette’s portrayal of a concerned neighbor in the housing development, they are viewed as avaricious bimbos.  The hysteria all swirls around Jasira (Summer Bishil), a juicy 13-year-old Lebanese-American girl with a healthy sexual curiosity, whose classmates taunt her with names like “towelhead” and “camel jockey.” Her father, Rifat (Peter Macdissi), a divorced Lebanese-born engineer who works for NASA but retains a straitlaced Middle Eastern code of values, frets about Jasira’s budding sexuality and dream of becoming a centerfold.  As the movie begins, Jasira moves to Houston from Syracuse,  where she has been living with her angry, embittered mother, Gail (Maria Bello). The catalyst for the move is inappropriate behavior toward the girl by Gail’s boyfriend, Barry (Chris Messina). On arriving in Texas, Jasira experiences immediate culture shock. Her father, observing her dressed like an ordinary American teenager, finds her outfit outrageously provocative and strikes her hard in the face.  To Travis Vuoso (Aaron Eckhart), the married Army Reservist next door for whose bratty young son she baby-sits, Jasira is irresistible jailbait.  A classmate (Eugene Jones) is equally besotted; Rifat pronounces him off limits because he is black; Jasira rebels.  “Towelhead” may have been conceived as a dark comedy, but it is rarely funny. It pointedly presents Rifat and Travis as an unlikely two of a kind. If one is an overprotective father, and the other a predator, both see Jasira as an inflammatory force of nature and tend to blame her for it.  Rifat’s obsequious new girlfriend, Thena (Lynn Collins), and Travis’s nasty wife, Evelyn (Carrie Preston), are both all-American cheerleader types. The two men conspicuously fly American flags on their small, manicured lawns. Rifat  is a rah-rah American warmonger who hates Saddam Hussein with a passion.  Jasira is a softer variation of Angela Hayes, the teasing, trash-talking cheerleader played by Mena Suvari in “American Beauty.” Like Angela, Jasira is not the person either her father or Travis sees through sexual eyes. Ms. Bishil, who is 20, creates a convincing portrait of a confused 13-year-old girl being manipulated from all sides.  In its depiction of a hapless young woman as the flashpoint of a culture war, “Towelhead” recalls the superior “Citizen Ruth,” in which a young woman’s pregnancy rallies vociferous   forces on both sides of the abortion battle.  Even more than in “American Beauty,” suburbia is portrayed as a hellish hothouse of repression and lust, where everyone minds everyone else’s business. In this overheated atmosphere the tension suggests the opposing worlds of “Wife Swap” and “Trading Spouses”  forced  together in a no-win conflict. The movie is a barely disguised hate letter to southern Texas.  Because “Towelhead” is set in pre-9/11  America, almost a decade before the presidency of George W. Bush, it is also a period piece. Evangelical Christianity has yet to be mobilized as a national political force, and Islamic jihadism is only a murmur beyond the horizon. The cracks in the political landscape may have formed, but they have not opened into the chasms they are today.  “Towelhead” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).  It has scenes of sexual abuse of a young girl  and clinical sexual talk.

Alan Ball goes one for two in his feature helming debut, hitting a double with his provocative script but fouling out with his directing in "Towelhead." Maintaining consistent tone and performances in such a stylized "period piece" (a teenage girl's period is just one of many touchy subjects broached here) is of the utmost importance, and the "Six Feet Under" auteur doesn't have the control to keep it from veering all over the place, to queasy and debilitating effect. Ball's rep and pic's topical nature provide sufficient talking points to assure a certain profile in specialized release, but critical reaction will be very divided, and Warner Independent and Red Envelope, which picked up the film at Toronto, will have to get behind it 200% to give it a real theatrical shot.
Script is adapted from Alicia Erian's novel "Towelhead," about a 13-year-old girl bounced between her American mother and Lebanese father -- neither a paragon of civility, emotional stability or common sense -- and drenched in a toxic environment that encourages precocious sexual activity.
On top of that, characters' attitudes are shot through with racial and cultural prejudices and assumptions that fly in every possible direction, all against the backdrop of the first Gulf War. Stacking the deck with so many loaded issues demands great finesse in knowing how to play the cards, and this is where the writer is revealed not to be the best custodian of his own material.

Pic doesn't do itself any favors in the first few minutes, as it throws a collection of gross and rude behavior in the audience's face before the characters are properly introduced: Pubescent Jasira (Summer Bishil) compliantly has her pubic hair shaved by the uncouth b.f. of her ill-tempered mother Gail (Maria Bello); when she's shipped off to Houston to live with her father Rifat (Peter Macdissi), Jasira gets a chilly reception and is slapped for wearing a too-revealing outfit.
The provocations continue apace. Rifat, a baffling combination of disciplinarian and libertine, is a U.S. citizen and a Christian, works for NASA, lives in a bland suburban tract house and, to the confusion of neighbors who think of him simply as an Arab, is violently anti-Saddam and in favor of the U.S. taking him out. When he allows his daughter to babysit the obnoxious 11-year-old boy next door, little does he imagine the kid will turn her on to sex magazines, or that the brat's dad, Mr. Vuoso (Aaron Eckhart), an Army reservist waiting to be called up, will bloody his fingers, as shown in extreme closeup, by violating the little girl.
With all of the above and much to come, the film intends to startle with its upfront taboo-breaking, its depiction of the sexual explorations of barely double-digit-aged characters, and of adult complicity in them. This alone will turn many viewers off. But it also means to make you laugh at the characters' infinite foibles, as indicated by the arch tone, brittle line readings, outre situations and absurd juxtapositions.
The comic pitch and poisonous suburban family dynamics are reminiscent of the Ball-scripted "American Beauty," but there director Sam Mendes hit the desired tone, both visually and performance-wise. There are laughs in "Towelhead," but far more of it is just weird to the point of being questionable; many scenes are too preposterous to be realistic, but if they don't come off as funny, they just seem silly, if not noxious.
As the running time pushes toward two hours and beyond, the lack of any real plot becomes an increasing drag on the enterprise. Biggest ongoing conflict is Jasira's relationship with horny black schoolmate Tommy (Eugene Jones).
The point in the end is that with Tommy and Mr. Vuoso, as well as with her parents, Jasira is so young that she goes along with the abuse, and doesn't even really know that's what it is, until her gradual awakening to the gravity of her mistreatment. In time-honored fashion, there needs to be a scapegoat for what's occurred, but in the film's view, all are guilty to a degree, as is society at large, for its banality and intense degree of sexualization.
But the picture itself is also culpable on the last two counts. Visually, it's hard to see what Ball and lenser Newton Thomas Sigel are going for. Settings are bland, and the filmmakers douse them with a sort of orange-brown highlighting that is exceptionally unattractive.
Even more crucial are the performances. Centerstage most of the time, the petite Bishil is capable and not disagreeable to watch, but one never truly knows what she's thinking, and she seems more like a vessel for other people's preoccupations and hang-ups than a fully formed character in her own right. Eckhart is regular-guy-creepy, Bello is a fright, Jones so straightforward that no sensitivities or doubts show up, and Toni Collette, playing a sympathetic neighbor who takes Jasira in for a while, emerges as the most "normal" of the bunch.
The key player, however, is Macdissi. Responsive to the film's comic intentions in a way the others are not, mustachioed thesp at times recalls Peter Sellers in his deliberately absurd crispness and assuredness, and he gets most of the film's best laughs. But he also occasionally suffers from being on a comic limb when the others are not out there with him; Ball just leaves him hanging, or doesn't know how to get the others in synch with Macdissi's superior instincts.
So "Towelhead" is transgressive without being effectively subversive, gutsy to no particular end. It simply lacks style, which counts for so much in this sort of thing.


American Beauty  scribe Alan Ball  makes his dreaded feature-directing debut with another tale of suburban purgatory, featuring yet another erotically stifled military man (though pederasty is the forbidden fruit here). Unfolding around the events of the first Gulf War, Towelhead —cringe—follows Jasira (Summer Bishil ), a pubescent half-Lebanese girl relocated to live with her father (Peter Macdissi ) in Texas sprawl country. Through parental neglect and her own extreme introversion, Jasira's been left to piece together the Sex-Ed basics; as the film's moronic title broadcasts, her journey will be a "provocative" one—and so Ball, who can't conceive of human motives beyond the hypertrophic, smutty sexuality that's his stock in trade, primly divides his characters into avatars of Sick Repression or Healthy Liberation. Hemmed in by her father's Old World patriarchal prohibitions, her own porn-induced body-loathing, and her touchy-feely G.I. neighbor (Aaron Eckhart ), Jasira finds shelter with an "earthy" young Edie Brickell –listening couple (presumably Dukakis voters). Intellectual slackness breeds pictorial indifference in endless gray, underlit rooms strafed with hot splotches of "sunlight" suggesting a perpetual supernova outdoors. That our heroine's first menstruation is announced by a low-angle shot through the gore-sullied panties will tell you everything you need to know about that famous Alan Ball touch.
