 The adults in “Treeless Mountain” do not appear purposefully cruel, though they often appear as cold, remote and mysterious as the stars in the sky. The film, the second feature from the Brooklyn-based writer and director So Yong Kim, tells a quiet, carefully observed story about two young girls — 6-year-old Jin and her 4-year old sister, Bin — who become orphans of a kind after their mother leaves them with relatives. Shot in South Korea, where Ms. Kim was born (her family immigrated to America when she was 12), it has the tang of real life, though this is realism that has been filtered through 60 or so years of world art cinema.  Ms. Kim, whose first feature was “In Between Days,” a minimalist exercise about an emotionally isolated teenager, has chosen a more accessible subject for her new film: the desertion of two children. Her style also feels more approachable: the film opens with close-ups of Jin (the serious-eyed Hee Yeon Kim, making her film debut) attentively following a lesson at school, a cozy perspective from which Ms. Kim never budges. (For much of the story, she is the only grown-up watching over the girls.) Jin and Bin (Song Hee Kim) live with their worried-looking mother (Soo Ah Lee) in a cramped Seoul apartment until suddenly they don’t, having been carted off to live with her sister-in-law, whom they call Big Aunt (Mi Hyang Kim).  A heavy drinker who directs the children to stack her empties, Big Aunt doesn’t come equipped with a warm, enveloping maternal bosom. She is negligent, cranky, resentful and given to voluble complaint. She doesn’t appear to want to care for the girls, which, in view of her dipsomaniac tendencies,  seems reasonable, even wise.  It’s a relief when, at the mother’s prodding, she takes them to their grandparents’ farm, partly because this development promises changes in scenery, tone and point of view, along with the promise of narrative tension. The scenery does change, but the tone remains unmodulated, the point of view claustrophobic, and no narrative tension emerges from the drifty, prettily shot, repetitive images of the children navigating everyday life. The grandmother (Boon Tak Park, a nonprofessional) does prove kind.  Through her close attention to Jin’s and Bin’s habits, exchanges and tears, which she captures with a low-placed camera and hushed sense of intimacy, Ms. Kim quickly pulls you into this Lilliputian world. You see what they see, learn what they learn. The problem is that while the children are lovely because they are children, there is nothing inherently interesting about them or their lives. Their predicament is the stuff of melodrama, but from the loose (if linear) narrative and pockets of ambiguity (why did the father leave?) it’s clear that Ms. Kim has positioned her film in a different tradition, one that borrows heavily from Yasujiro Ozu (specifically with the transitional shots tucked between scenes), Vittorio De Sica and other non-Hollywood masters, even as the story makes a beeline toward some unsurprising uplift.

Any movie featuring children under 10 is a movie wherein documentary bids to trump fiction and behavior can eclipse acting. The 1934 New Deal flag-waver Stand Up and Cheer! will remain ever fresh for featuring five-year-old Shirley Temple 's precocious (and relatively unedited) hoofing alongside genuinely incredulous veteran vaudevillian James Dunn .
Kid performers naturally introduce elements of magic and mystery into the most banal of situations. They are most resonant, however, when their characters are compelled to fend for themselves—childhood as an existential condition—as in Morris Engel 's The Little Fugitive  (1953), Jafar Panahi 's The White Balloon  (1995), Jacques Doillon 's Ponette  (1996), or, opening this week at Film Forum, So Yong Kim 's Treeless Mountain .
Actually, Treeless Mountain , an American indie made in Korea, doubles the condition by featuring two round-faced, bright-eyed children. Already a latch-key kid with a distracted, prematurely worn mother, six-year-old Jin (Hee-yeon Kim , no relation to the director) is uprooted, along with her younger sister, Bin (Song-hee Kim , unrelated to both), and left in a distant town to stay with a gruffly alcoholic "big aunt," while mom goes in search of the girls' feckless father.
Less mean than selfishly irresponsible (particularly as compared to Jin), Big Aunt complains about her charges, spends their food money on rice wine, sends them out to beg the neighbors for salt, uses a playground scratch to extort cash from other parents, and occasionally goes AWOL. She also neglects to enroll the girls in school—leaving them even more to their own devices. Resentful but resourceful, Jin and her sidekick cadge treats from the nice mommy of a mentally retarded boy living next-door, and then go into business—catching and roasting grasshoppers to sell to other children as snacks.
The girls accumulate coins and carefully deposit them in the piggy bank that is the signifier of their mother's return. She left it with them, explaining that she would be back when it was full. As literal-minded as these two extremely well-behaved children are, they assume that changing their large-denomination coins for a fistful of smaller ones will hasten the happy day. Their magical thinking is perfectly pitched. Like Kim's previous film, In Between Days , about a teenaged Korean girl recently arrived in North America, Treeless Mountain  is at least emotionally autobiographical. (The filmmaker says she was similarly deposited when her mother immigrated to the U.S.)
Predicated on the natural resilience of their pint-size protagonists, kid-perf movies are necessarily affirmative. (As Lillian Gish  says of her little charges in the not-unrelated, but considerably darker, Night of the Hunter : They abide.) Treeless Mountain  is no exception to this rule, although it's also canny enough to resist musical cues or other forms of overt emotional manipulation. Even when the children have been doubly abandoned, dumped by Big Aunt at their maternal grandparents' farm, Treeless Mountain  is skillfully unsentimental—because of, but also despite, the presence of two irresistible, unself-conscious performers in virtually every scene. The children are almost always shot in close-up. The tight focus on the girls gives the film a pleasingly spare quality even as it allows the filmmaker to assemble their performances shot by shot. (As an exercise, it suggests the way that the sound mixers on Guys and Dolls  painstakingly dubbed tone-deaf Marlon Brando 's songs, note by note.)
Taking its title from the barren mound of dirt overlooking the bus stop where the girls last saw their mother, Treeless Mountain  is a careful construction. Indeed, the movie is so closely edited that one is never quite sure how much time has elapsed since the kids were abandoned. But then, that's part of the pathos—neither do they.
The kids are most definitely not all right in The Informers . This lurid trash compacter—directed by Gregor Jordan  from Bret Easton Ellis 's 1994 novel—is set in haute Los Angeles during the early years of the Reagan Era. With its crass, sleek brand of alienation, the movie might have been shot back then as well.
As the novel's two grottiest characters—a vampire and a child-mutilator—have been written out of the script by Ellis and Nicholas Jarecki , The Informers  is mainly a spectacle of privileged, pretty young people (and youthful actors) acting badly. Nights of omnisexual anomie, days of robotic synth-music videos, druggy excess, teenage orgies, and (as this is an '80s allegory) a virulent mystery infection: Are these kids truly depraved or just fucked up? Bad parents? Too much television? A toxic environment? Peering out down the galactic sprawl as his plane comes in for a landing at LAX, a perpetually stoned Billy Idol –type (Mel Raido ) is heard to plaintively mumble, "I used to live here, didn't I?" You know you're in Los AngEllis when a pool boy plucks a dead rat out of the drain.
Playing a tragically married couple of Tinseltown aristos, Billy Bob Thornton  and Kim Basinger  bring a weary measure of taut musculature and grown-up professionalism to the movie. Basinger's erstwhile '80s co-star, Mickey Rourke , is on hand as a dissolute prince of darkness; most lizardly in a leather porkpie hat, an orange tan, and some scraggly D'Artagnan-style facial shrubbery, Rourke elevates the movie's sleaze count even as he deflects his scenes toward narcoleptic comedy. Winona Ryder  provides another odd flashback, in the role of Thornton's newsgal mistress. So does Chris Isaak , his leer polished to a blinding sheen, as the worst of the hideous parentals, having hauled his son off to the beach at Waikiki  for some competitive jailbait cruising.
