At first, Apichatpong Weerasethakul's murky art movie Tropical Malady  is about a romance between a young Thai soldier and a country boy. Then the boy disappears — perhaps he has been transformed into a magical beast — and things change for the even more mythic as the soldier pushes into the heart of the jungle in pursuit. There is no loss of art-movie face to be had, I assure you, in admitting difficulty with the filmmaker's intentional tangle of genres as he stakes his story between waking life and legend: It took me two viewings to enjoy the landscape of Weerasethakul's mysterious jungle — so very thick, steamy, and foreign — without wishing for clearer trail markers.

 Correction Appended  "Tropical Malady" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Manohla Dargis's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2. The unrated film, in Thai with English subtitles, opens today at the IFC Center, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village.  Love is the drug, a game for two and, in the otherworldly Thai film "Tropical Malady," unabashedly strange. A fractured love story about the mystery and impossibility of desire, the film was directed by Apichatpong Weerasethakul, whose earlier features include "Blissfully Yours." Perched between two worlds, two consciousnesses and two radically different storytelling traditions, this new feature shows a young filmmaker pushing at the limits of cinematic narrative with grace and a certain amount of puckish willfulness.  Set in contemporary Thailand, "Tropical Malady" opens with soldiers taking photographs of one another in a field. Shot in the loose, hand-held style of much contemporary documentary, the scene seems perfectly ordinary until you realize that there's a dead body on the ground and that the soldiers are actually snapping trophy shots. The full import of this tableau doesn't become clear until much later, when Mr. Weerasethakul returns us to a similar-looking field (it may be the same one) as if to the scene of a crime. By then, the story's two principal characters, the shy country boy Tong (Sakda Kaewbuadee) and a beautiful soldier named Keng (Banlop Lamnoi), will have been stricken by the tropical malady of the film's title and fallen in love.  When "Tropical Malady" had its premiere at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival, the critical consensus was that the movie was difficult to the point of inscrutability. But the story is, notwithstanding a surprising rupture midway through, nothing if not simple. Most of the first half of the film involves the tentative blossoming of Tong and Keng's romance. In street scenes and country interludes, again shot in the intimate style of hand-held documentary, the men giggle and flirt; they share confidences, meals, music and adventures. As the days slip by imperceptibly, they take Tong's dog to a veterinarian's office, play games in the dark and descend into an underground temple where a small Buddhist icon sits draped in twinkling lights, a tinny recording chirping out Christmas music. Love blooms, however chastely.  Mr. Weerasethakul, who lives in Thailand and studied film and painting at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, has an appreciation of the more humorous dislocations of globalization, like an aerobics class in the middle of a dusty town. "Tropical Malady" is filled with such minor disruptions (including a woman who talks about ghosts in one breath and "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire" in the next), but the biggest disruption takes place when the storytelling shifts from realism to allegory. Set in the deepest, darkest heart of the jungle, this part of the film finds Keng tracking a ghostly figure who periodically assumes the shape of a tiger. That the figure should turn out to be the soldier's elusive lover, the object of his desire, should come as no surprise. Frankly, I was more taken aback by the talking baboon.  Correction: July 2, 2005, Saturday: A film review on Wednesday about "Tropical Malady," which opened that day at the IFC Center in Greenwich Village, misspelled the name of the actor who plays Keng. (The error also appeared in an article on June 26 about the director of the movie, Apichatpong Weerasethakul, and in a review last Oct. 2, when it was shown at the New York Film Festival.) The actor is Banlop Lomnoi, not Lamnoi. 
World cinema's premier maker of mysterious objects, Apichatpong Weerasethakul  is on a one-man mission to change the way we watch movies. Rich and strange, postmodern and prehistoric, his films foster an experience of serene bewilderment and—for the willing viewer—euphoric surrender. They are suffused with a sense of wide-open possibility that sometimes explodes into epiphany—as in 2002's sensual pastoral Blissfully Yours , which, a third of the way through, hits the reset button by way of a long-delayed credit roll. Tropical Malady —the Thai director's fourth feature, winner of a Jury Prize at Cannes  last year—boasts an even more severe disjunction. Instructively titled, Malady  is split down the middle between lovesick daydream and malarial delirium. An idyllic first half, which recounts in fleeting fragments the intensifying attraction between handsome soldier Keng and bashful farm boy Tong, gives way to a nocturnal folk tale that likewise traces an anatomy of desire, but this time with the soldier amid an unearthly menagerie of tiger spirits, phantom cattle, and an aphorism-dispensing baboon.
How do the two halves connect? Which one is real—or realer? Are these pertinent questions? On the festival circuit, Tropical Malady 's mid-movie shape-shift was perceived as something of a conceptual prank (the mass confusion at last fall's NYFF screening was amusingly palpable). Still, lulling and pleasurably levitated as it may be, the first section is hardlystraightforward or even explicable—right from the uneasy opening scene, in which an army troop cheerfully poses for photos with a dead body.
Incidental mysteries pile up. Some are casually explained (why Tong, the civilian, sometimes dresses in military uniform), but most linger as gentle bafflements (the swan, the naked guy). Like Blissfully Yours  and Apichatpong's first feature, the exquisite-corpse road movie Mysterious Object at Noon  (2000), Tropical Malady  promotes new ways of seeing. These films, at once rapt and dislocated, have the flavor of hallucinated documentary. They compel the viewer to look anew at the ordinary, to modulate their passive gaze into a patient, quizzical scrutiny. And what's more, Tropical Malady  is a film that looks back at you. The characters have a habit of staring into the camera—a gesture that usually signifies complicity, though the effect is vaguely discomfiting here, since we're not sure what we're complicit in. Malady Diary , a making-of doc that I saw at this year's Bangkok  Film Festival (Strand should nab it for the Tropical  DVD), sheds some light on the methodology behind the madness: Apichatpong tells his nonpro leads, Banlop Lomnoi and Sakda Kaewbuadee, to "act as if you're in a movie."
J. Hoberman's description of Blissfully Yours —"unconscionably happy"—is no less apt here. Part one of Tropical Malady  plays almost like a parodic affirmation of Thailand 's tourist-board image as the "land of smiles." Everyone radiates faintly concussed grins, and the mood-enhanced vibe is both infectious and a little troubling—one irrationally blinding smile in a men's bathroom just about stops the film dead in its tracks. Keng and Tong's romance may be coy and tentative, but I can't think of another movie that depicts a same-sex relationship with such lovely matter-of-factness—the traveling shot of the boys on a motorbike is pure joy (Apichatpong's characters seem happiest when in motion). They share an easy intimacy that grows increasingly erotic—entwining limbs in a movie theater, and in a startling scene that prefigures the imminent reversion to the animal state, submitting a possibly urine-stained hand to a taste test.
But before getting to coitus, Tropical Malady  enacts its radical interruptus. The film abruptly halts, fades to black, and is reborn—with a fresh title, A Spirit's Path —as a wordless, primordial cat-and-mouse dance/mating ritual between hunter and hunted, complete with intertitles and cave drawings. Keng (or is it still him?) enters the jungle in search of an unspecified livestock-killing creature, only to confront a tiger ghost that on occasion appears as a face-painted, body-tattooed Tong.
If Tropical Malady 's first half is a sunny utopia clouded by intimations of disquiet (like the detour to an underground temple), the second is about getting used—or giving in—to the unbearable night. (The director told James Quandt  in an Artforum  interview: "The break in the middle of the film is a mirror in the center that reflects both ways.") The jungle is infinitely vast and dark, home to restless spirits and elaborately gnarled trees that emit ominous burbling noises; the rustling, chirping, buzzing cacophony suggests a demented white-noise machine. Like fearful, trembling Keng, the viewer is often stranded in blackness (and when your eyes adjust, what you see can be a shock).
The rupture transmigrates the narrative into a mystical realm, but it's unclear if Keng and Tong have been banished or elevated to this plane of existence. Was their love too intense for the material world? Does the fulfillment of animal hungers require the cover of darkness? The film's mysteries are so cosmic that any attempt to ascribe allegory can seem puny. One offhand early scene may hold the key to the metaphysics. After a brief discussion about the persistence of memory through past and future lives, Keng (in one of the greatest lines in the history of courtship) tells Tong, "When I gave you the Clash  tape I forgot to give you my heart. You can have it today." He rubs his palm on his beloved's back, as if massaging a piece of himself under the skin. This bifurcated film dramatizes what Roland Barthes  in A Lover's Discourse  called "the dream of total union." The soldier, face to face with the pursuer that is also the object of desire, heeds the advice of the talking baboon: "Let him devour you and enter his world." And as the lovers merge—in an act of consumption and communion and consummation—so too, finally, do the film's divided halves.
