 “I don’t want you to think I just used you or anything,” a polite young hunk says to Diane Ford (Michelle Monaghan), moments after their steamy tryst, as she hurries to leave their motel room in the opening scene of “Trucker.” A lean, attractive woman with a hard look in her eye, Diane is in such a rush to get back to work driving an enormous rig that she doesn’t bother to thank the stranger for a good time.  That kind of one-night stand has traditionally been the perquisite of macho kings of the road who drive the same kind of gigantic trucks Diane is shown operating with a brisk efficiency. Seizing a role that a decade ago would have been offered to Ashley Judd, Ms. Monaghan (“Eagle Eye,” “Kiss Kiss Bang Bang,” “Mission Impossible III”) makes the most of her character, a can-do, don’t-waste-my-time kind of gal without a shred of sentimentality, impatiently elbowing her way into a male-dominated occupation.  Diane’s free-spirited life is suddenly complicated when her estranged 11-year-old son, Peter (Jimmy Bennett), is dropped off at her California home without advance notice. The boy’s father, Len (Benjamin Bratt), whom Diane hasn’t seen in more than a decade, is in the hospital with colon cancer. Because his current partner, Jenny (Joey Lauren Adams), has urgent family business to take care of, the boy has nowhere else to stay but with his biological mother.  If Ms. Monaghan gives a possibly award-worthy performance in “Trucker,” the vehicle (if you will pardon the pun) doesn’t quite know what to do with her character. And so the movie, the first feature written and directed by James Mottern, turns into a conventional mother-child reunion drama that stops just short of becoming a fuzzy tear-jerking celebration of the emergence of Diane’s Inner Mom.  Rather than give up work and remain home, Diane decides to take Peter on the road with her. Warily, the mother and son begin to warm to each other. Diane shows that she cares by pitching baseballs to her son and going after some teenagers who harass him at a mini-mall. But she never loses her feisty edge. The movie’s biggest failure is its refusal to allow either mother or son a moment’s reflection about their years apart.  The movie throws in an awkward, underdeveloped subplot involving Diane and her drinking buddy, Runner (Nathan Fillion), a married next-door neighbor who, like every man to cross Diane’s path, is besotted with her. After one barhopping expedition, Diane, who holds her liquor better than most men, bodily drags Runner out of a pickup truck and plops him at his front door.  The truck stops, dispatching offices, highways and unglamorous neighborhoods through which Diane moves with a lithe, confident stride are minimally sketched in a movie that cries out for more detail and pungent atmosphere. When Mr. Bratt, looking seriously peaked, belatedly appears, his abbreviated scene with Ms. Monaghan leaves you wishing for more history about a connection that both agree was sizzling at its outset.  “Trucker” sometimes feels like a performance in search of a movie.  “Trucker” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has one sex scene and some strong language.

Playing a negligent mother isn't usually the way to get ahead in the acting biz, but the elfin Michelle Monaghan must have seen "Trucker" as her vehicle out of the ingenue parking lot of sidekicks and potential hostages. A tale of a mother suddenly saddled with the son she'd never wanted, helmer James Mottern's drama of maternal awakening could stir a few heartstrings, and its decent cast could keep it chugging along, vis-a-vis B.O. For most of the trip, however, it's spinning its narrative wheels.
Thanks to her sexy/boyish looks, Monaghan, who's been the subordinate female lead in "Mission Impossible III," "Gone Baby Gone" and "Kiss Kiss Bang Bang," makes a convincingly hard case as Diane Ford, a long-haul trucker with very little sentiment in her system and a few hard miles behind her. When her ex-husband (Benjamin Bratt) gets colon cancer, his wife (Joey Lauren Adams) has to prevail upon Diane to take care of her son. It's not a happy arrangement for anyone.
From here, "Trucker" begins its long breakdown. Peter (Jimmy Bennett) is not so much confused as confusing, his anger at his mother too of-the-moment and petulant for a kid who's had years to stew over his abandonment (and who has not, apparently, ever been told a kind word about his mom). And he's got a pretty foul mouth for a kid everyone refers to as well-adjusted. Add the fact that young Bennett doesn't bring much to Mottern's flaccid script and what you've got is a character you'd like to strap to the hood of a diesel-burning Peterbilt and drive to Phoenix.
Monaghan is a talent, but she, too, has trouble finding a rhythm in the dialogue, or any sustained emotional plausibility in a film that relies on character-driven moments rather than narrative momentum. And there's simply not enough between the lines for writer-director Mottern to get away with such a slight story.
Like a runaway tractor-trailer, "Trucker" is carrying Diane directly from irresponsible to maternally alert. You can't stop it. You can see it on the horizon as soon as the movie starts. What's missing from the payload is surprise.
"Trucker" also takes a long time to shift out of first gear, long enough to set up, at length, Diane's unorthodox relationship with Runner (Nathan Fillion), a married local with whom she shares a lot of time and a lot of drinks. Fillion is good as the frustrated lover, who eventually shows he has a gentle way with the kid, and his mother, too.
Tech credits are adequate, and lensing suitably grainy for the story.
Camera (color), Lawrence Sher; editor, Deirdre Slevin; music, Mychael Danna; production designer, Cabot McMullen; set decorator, Beth Wooke; costume designer, Johanna Argan; sound, Dennis Grzesik; supervising sound editor, Lewis Goldstein; visual effects, John Bair, Edgeworx; assistant director, Daniel Shultz. Reviewed at Tribeca Film Festival (competing), April 25, 2008. Running time: 90 MIN.
 


After undervalued supporting turns in Kiss Kiss Bang Bang , North Country , and Gone Baby Gone , dainty girl-next-door type Michelle Monaghan  finally, and deservedly, snags a star vehicle to show off her chops. Against the roadside Americana of writer-director James Mottern 's well-shot desert drama, Monaghan flips the bird to vanity as a hard-drinking, promiscuous, blithe, and ballsy big-rig driver named Diane, and her performance is transformative enough to forgive Mottern's boilerplate narrative. It's the negligent parent and estranged child forced-reunion tale: Diane's long-hauler lifestyle is literally slowed down when her angry 11-year-old son, Peter (Jimmy Bennett ), gets dumped in her lap after baby-daddy Len (Benjamin Bratt ) is hospitalized with cancer. There may as well be a road sign announcing Diane's transformation from reckless loner to diligent mother, but it's a smooth ride thanks to Monaghan, and an impressive ensemble. Bennett, last seen in Shorts , proves one of the more talented, least cloyingly precocious child actors today, and the always-charming Nathan Fillion  continues his run as a married local who can barely suppress his feelings for bar buddy Diane.
