 As a poet, activist and spoken-word performer, John Trudell is one of the most prominent and passionate advocates for Native American rights. From the 1969-71 occupation of Alcatraz by the American Indian Movement to the campaign to free Leonard Peltier, convicted of the 1975 killings of two F.B.I. agents, Mr. Trudell has fought tirelessly for fair treatment for his people.  Assembling an impressive collage of newsreels, live performances and interviews with admirers, "Trudell" delivers a fascinating account of its subject's most turbulent crusades. But the man who calls Western civilization "the great lie" and once compared Christopher Columbus to Osama bin Laden deserves more daring and objective scrutiny than this overly reverent tribute. No one in the film has a bad word to say about Mr. Trudell, despite his 17,000-page F.B.I. dossier; and by the time Robert Redford assures us that meeting him is not dissimilar to meeting the Dalai Lama, you may feel that all this worship does not do justice to an unusually stormy and complicated life.

"Trudell" obviously is a labor of love, but that may not be such a good thing. More hagiography than history, Heather Rae's long-in-production portrait of Native American activist and poet John Trudell has the uncritically admiring feel of authorized biography. Technically uneven pic, shot over 13 years in various video and film formats, is best suited for niche fests, pubcast showcases and not-for-profit outlets. 
Most arresting section covers Trudell's involvement with 1969-71 occupation of Alcatraz Island by Native Americans, an incident that helped spark the growth of the "Red Pride" movement. Pic covers ground already examined in James M. Fortier's "Alcatraz Is Not an Island" (2001 docu included a Trudell interview), but fixes tighter focus on Trudell's emergence as a dynamic spokesperson for all tribes represented at the occupation.
Rae also details the title subject's eventful 1973-79 term as chairman of American Indian Movement (AIM), during which Trudell frequently protested the trial, conviction and imprisonment of Leonard Peltier, the Native American charged with killing two FBI agents during a raid on Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota. Case was covered more extensively in another previous docu, Michael Apted's "Incident at Oglala" (1992), which also featured interviews with Trudell.
"Trudell" remains interesting, but appreciably less compelling, while charting the activist's evolution into a poet and musician following the mysterious deaths of his wife, children and mothers-in-law in a 1979 house fire that many claim was deliberately set by political enemies. Footage of Trudell in concert as a spoken-word artist accompanied by musicians indicate his work, however impassioned, is very much an acquired taste. Here and elsewhere, however, Trudell comes across as a charismatic figure whose gravely thoughtful demeanor is leavened with self-effacing humor.
Surprisingly, the pic makes relatively little of Trudell's appearances as supporting actor in such diverse pics as "Smoke Signals," "Powwow Highway," "Thunderheart" and "Extreme Measures" (latter two directed by "Oglala" helmer Apted). Val Kilmer and Sam Shepard, top-billed stars of "Thunderheart," figure prominently among celebs who offer on-screen testimonials to Trudell. Others include Robert Redford, Bonnie Raitt, Kris Kristofferson and Jackson Browne.
Camera (color/b&w, DV), Gilbert Salas, Rae; editors, Gregory Bayne, Rae; sound, Kent Sparling; associate producer, Faye Brown. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 29, 2005. Running time: 75 MIN.
 


As depicted in Heather Rae 's hagiographic cinematic c.v. Trudell , the life of Indian activist turned spoken-word performer John Trudell—a "poet, artist, spokesperson, spiritualist" (as Robert Redford  labels him)—is a rebuke to F. Scott Fitzgerald 's famous maxim: It's hard to imagine a more American second act than the one documented here. Unfortunately, Rae's film is also split down the middle, and the appeal of its latter half depends on your tolerance for earnest politico-poetry set to wailing rock guitar and Native American chants and extraneously endorsed by celebrity talking heads. The backstory portion of the film, though, chock-full of archival footage and contemporary interviews with Trudell and his American Indian Movement cohorts, is riveting. From the late-'60s occupation of Alcatraz Island  to his burning of an American flag at FBI  headquarters in 1979 (the same day his wife and kids died in a mysterious reservation fire), Trudell helped lead a faction of the civil rights movement that's largely been forgotten. Indeed, while Trudel  l 's Sundance-style agitprop most assuredly preaches to the choir, it also recalls a time when organized political resistance was the stuff of nightly newscasts rather than the white-liberal-guilt-baiting pop-cultural backwater Trudell labors in (albeit contentedly) these days.
