 Tru (Najarra Townsend) has two mommies — one black (Cynda Williams), one white (Alexandra Paul), both lesbians — and they’re all living happily ever after. Or were, at least, until they left San Francisco.  Transplanted to a conservative suburb in Southern California, Tru is suddenly confronted with a local phenomenon as unfamiliar as year-round sunshine: homophobia in her high school. She starts a relationship with Lodell (Matthew Thompson), the handsome high school quarterback who turns out to be, whaddya know, a gay man on the down low. To shield Lodell from his bigoted peers, or at least his own ego issues, Tru grudgingly agrees to be his beard.  Drama ensues as Tru, living up to her righteous name, establishes a gay-straight alliance at school where assorted bi-curious types mingle, along with an actual gay named Walter (Tye Olson) and the superhot, suspiciously stylish but only apparently gay Trevor (Jake Abel).  Will Lodell come out and get down with Walter? Will Tru and Trevor make sweet, progressive love? And, more important, does the world need yet another peppy  gay self-esteem indie like “Tru Loved”? Probably not, though the writer and director Stewart Wade pulls this one off with heart.

If "Coffee Date" writer-director Stewart Wade's new "Tru Loved" plays like an "Afterschool Special," that may well mean it's fulfilled its function -- as an entertaining tolerance lesson targeted at teens. Better making points via humor than sometimes heavy-handed earnestness, pic is savvy enough to package a gay-sensitivity-training crash course in terms that will overcome most young auds' resistance, although discriminating adults might roll their eyes at some baldly manipulative and stereotypical elements. Theatrical biz looks slight; cable, rental and educational exposure, hale.
Quintessentially Ringwald-ian "arty girl" Tru (Najarra Townsend) hates, hates, hates being moved from diverse San Francisco to Southern California suburbia due to a job offer one of her two moms (Alexandra Paul, Cynda Williams) couldn't turn down. Her new high school is ruled by jocks and unironic Valley Girl types who view her moderately boho dress, let alone her lesbian mothers, as proof she's a freak -- and most likely "lesbo" by association.
Tru (short for Gertrude) is thus surprised when star quarterback Lodell (Matthew Thompson) asks her out. At least, he appears to: After some oddly chaste "dates," heroine realizes she's being used as a beard -- or as the script wickedly phrases it, a "Katie Holmes" -- for deeply closeted Lodell, whose best friend Manny (Joseph Julian Soria) and coach (Vernon Wells) exhale homophobia like carbon dioxide. Feeling kinship with Lodell nonetheless, Tru reluctantly agrees to carry on this masquerade.
Still, she chafes when her "boyfriend" turns a blind eye to the bullying of overtly gay student Walter (Tye Olsen). She starts a Gay-Straight Alliance at the school, an endeavor that earns both immediate success and backlash. Her loyalty to Lodell's ruse is further tested when dreamboat GSA sign-on Trevor (Jake Abel) turns out to be an open-minded hetero eager to be her real boyfriend.
Perfs by youth and parents (also including a barbed Jasmine Guy and Eartha-channeling Nichelle Nichols as Lodell's single mom and cranky grandma, respectively) are good. Glorified B-list cameos by Bruce Vilanch, Alec Mapa, Marcia Wallace, etc., tend toward hamminess.
Wells' homophobic coach, lone angry holdout amid an overdone climax that bowties every last plot string, is cartoonish. Likewise crude is the script's earmarking Lodell as gay by exposing him as a passionate showtune lover. Tru's fantasy scenes (one a lame "West Side Story" parody) are poor and gratuitous, though the real-world dialogue is often smart when not over-earnest.
Most of "Tru Loved" does a good job of appealing to kids who might otherwise be turned off by the subject (apparently, school screenings to date have gone very well).
Production values are pro, though as viewed at the San Francisco Lesbian & Gay Film Fest, the package just doesn't look or play like bigscreen material. Soundtrack heavy on tracks by undistinguished gay musicians (must so many lesbian singer-songwriters imitate Melissa Etheridge?) don't further that cause.
Camera (color, HD-to-DigiBeta), Howard Wexler; editor, David Avallone; music/music supervisor, Barry Coffing; production designer, James J. Agazzi; art director, David Brewer; costume designer, Augusta; sound, Daniel McCoy; supervising sound editors, Gabriel Heredia, Greg Vossberg; assistant directors, Avallone, Christian Clark. Reviewed at San Francisco Lesbian & Gay Film Festival, June 21, 2008. (Also in NewFest, New York.) Running time: 104 MIN.
 



Writer-director Stewart Wade's Tru Loved  is a kitschier incarnation of an after-school special: hokey and simplistic, but also gawkily sweet-natured. Recently relocated from San Francisco to the suburbs, Tru (Najarra Townsend ) and family—composed of her two lesbian mothers and two gay fathers—are introduced via faux-'50s sitcom stylings, with the movie temporarily switching from candy-color to black-and-white as cast members trot out to jaunty music. This ironic impulse co-exists somewhat uncomfortably with Tru Loved' s sincerity. Drawn to the newcomer's outsider edge, high-school quarterback Lodell (Matthew Thompson ) strikes up a romance with Tru, only to confess to his closeting shortly thereafter. (The film could've been titled, But I'm a Football Player .) "I didn't say I'd be your Katie Holmes ," she protests, before reluctantly agreeing to provide social cover for Lo by pretending to be his girlfriend. Matters get complicated when Tru spearheads a gay-straight alliance club with openly out Walter (Tye Olson ) and starts secretly dating straight dreamboat Trevor (Jake Abel ). Fluffiness aside, the film's multicultural microcosm does have a giddying effect: Tru Loved  offers a utopic vision of inclusiveness you wish the world would embrace.
