 “Tulpan,” the first fictional feature by the Kazakh director Sergey Dvortsevoy, might be described as an epic landscape film, a sweetly comic coming-of-age story or a lyrical work of social realism. But the setting — a windswept, sparely populated steppe in southern Kazakhstan — gives the movie a mood that sometimes feels closer to that of science fiction.  The terrain looks singularly unsuited to human habitation, and the nomads who tend their  sheep amid the ample dust and meager grass resemble residents of a half-forgotten outpost on a distant planet, waiting for a spaceship to fall from the sky.  At the same time, Asa (Askhat Kuchinchirekov), the young man whose struggles propel the film’s modest, keenly observed narrative, arrives in this place with a bit of the allure — and a lot of the alienation — of an intergalactic voyager who has crashed to Earth. Asa has just completed a stint in the navy, and he looks especially odd, so far from the water, when he puts on his sailor’s uniform. His command of nautical lore — for example, the predatory habits of the giant octopus — makes him all the more outlandish.  Asa is living with his sister Samal (Samal Yeslyamova) and her husband, Ondas (Ondasyn Besikbasov), a gruff and patriarchal herdsman who serves as Asa’s role model and mentor, but also as a wet blanket on some of the younger man’s dreams and ambitions.  Ondas has everything Asa wants: three children, a well-appointed yurt, scores of sheep scattered across the steppe. Not that everything is rosy: his ewes keep giving birth to dead lambs, and he is menaced by the specter of debt or dispossession. But his thorny temperament is profoundly at odds with Asa’s sensitive, boyish eagerness. And Asa wants so badly to be a man that he keeps tripping himself up.  “Tulpan” is named for the young woman Asa wants to marry. He courts her with Ondas’s assistance, bringing gifts to her elderly parents and working hard to beguile them with octopus stories. Tulpan’s face is never glimpsed on screen, and she rejects Asa out of hand because his ears are too big, but he nonetheless decides that he is in love with her. His passion, quixotic though it may be, is also heartfelt and genuinely touching, since it is a measure of his sincerity and his desire to infuse the hard, austere life ahead of him with a touch of romance.  There is a sweet, sentimental side to “Tulpan,” but Mr. Dvortsevoy applies his own romanticism sparingly, allowing his slender, poignant narrative to thread its way, at times almost imperceptibly, through the film’s rough and vivid documentary foreground. He is aware that for much of the audience, in urban Kazakhstan as well as abroad (where “Tulpan” has won several festival awards, including the Prix un Certain Regard at Cannes), the milieu and the characters will seem almost impossibly exotic.  Ethnographic curiosity is not in itself an illegitimate reason to see, or to make, a film like this one, which belongs to a tradition that stretches back to Robert Flaherty’s “Nanook of the North.” The risk is a kind of wide-eyed condescension, a patronizing appreciation of simpler, supposedly more authentic ways of life.  But there is nothing especially simple about life on the steppe, or, more crucially, about the emotions of the people who dwell on it, and the viewer quickly loses the sense of their foreignness, which is replaced by a feeling of recognition.  And also of astonishment at what Mr. Dvortsevoy and his collaborators (especially his co-writer, Gennady Ostrovskiy, and the cinematographer, Jola Dylewska) have achieved. One measure of this is suggested by an interview distributed with the film’s press materials, which includes the question, “Please tell us about working with sheep and especially how you accomplished the lamb birth scene.”  That scene, a milestone in cinematic ovine obstetrics, is both crucial to the story and a tour de force, the kind of thing a director like David Cronenberg or Takashi Miike would attempt only with prosthetics or other special effects. In “Tulpan” you see it for real, a perfectly ordinary event that is also something of a miracle.
A small mob of camels stampede by a nomad's tent, with something that might once have been a tractor eating the kicked-up dust. Inside, a young guy in a sailor suit sits on the rug, cheerfully recounting his death struggle with an octopus to the impassive middle-aged couple he's hoping will be his in-laws. Miscellaneous brays punctuate Asa's story, which is interrupted by a cutaway to a local funkster piloting his jalopy across the steppe, rocking out to "Rivers of Babylon ."
Tulpan , the first feature by Russian ethno-documentarian Sergei Dvortsevoy , winner of the Prix Un Certain Regard at Cannes , and shown once in the last New York Film Festival, is a fiction founded on a powerful sense of place—and that place, namely the vast nowhere void of southern Kazakhstan , could easily be another planet. The movie is not so much a documentary as it is a dramatic account of a documentary situation. Absence is the operating principle. The movie takes its name from the never-seen object of Asa's affections—evidently the only marriageable maiden in the territory.
Dvortsevoy has otherwise populated the inhospitable terrain of the so-called Hunger Steppe with actors who lived as nomadic sheepherders during the course of the shoot. Thus, the performers (Askhat Kuchencherekov as the luckless Asa, Samal Esljamova as his beautiful sister, Samal, and Ondas Besikbasov as her gruff, brooding husband, Ondas) settled into a yurt with a bunch of rambunctious kids—one monitoring the radio to recite the evening news, another shrilling traditional songs with a voice that could shatter glass, the third swatting everyone with a stick—as well as a gaggle of domestic animals, including the pet turtle that serves as a toy car.
"The most difficult thing for the actors was to be as strong as the animals," Dvortsevoy told an interviewer, "because all the animals in the film are fantastic, and the actors should not be worse." Indeed. In one unforgettable scene, the local veterinarian shows up, a cigarette dangling from his mouth and an extravagantly neck-bandaged baby camel in his motorcycle sidecar. In the movie's set piece, Asa—who has no facility for life on the steppe—stumbles across a very pregnant sheep and, in the absence of the more experienced Ondas, is compelled to midwife a live birth. His amazed sense of accomplishment is no act; Dvortsevoy required an improvisation in which the performer became identical with his character.
The 46-year-old maker of several previous movies set in the Central Asian outback (two of them, Highway  and Paradise , shown at Film Forum in 1999), Dvortsevoy could be the most artistically driven documentary filmmaker since Werner Herzog —living with his subjects for months (and sometimes years) and doing as much of the film work he can himself. He compares his preparation to painting a fresco and insists on shooting film rather than video ("Video means that you don't have to concentrate").
This rigorous method ensures a movie of which the spectator is constantly wondering how the filmmaker contrived to make it. As fluid as Tulpan  seems, it's painstakingly constructed out of a series of observed moments, staged interactions, and precisely dubbed sounds. Call it cacophonous minimalism. Everything makes noise—camels snort, sheep bleat, people declaim, machines sputter. This funkball pantheism suffuses the narrative. Tulpan  has a very simple story, but it's a continuously mysterious experience—at once direct and oblique and very much a show. The penultimate scene of Ondas and Samal pulling down their yurt suggests the striking of a set. The comedy is beyond absurd. When Asa finally does confront Tulpan, she's a she-goat.
Life's defining attribute, as portrayed in Tulpan , is cussedness. And if there's anyone more stubborn than Dvortsevoy's characters, it's the filmmaker himself—camping out on the steppe, waiting months for the precise weather conditions to shoot a particular scene. In every respect, this unclassifiable movie is an amazing accomplishment.
jhoberman@villagevoice.com
