uring the 28 years that the Berlin Wall stood, countless tunnels were planned as escape passageways from East to West. Roland Suso Richter's "Tunnel," based on harrowing true events, recounts the development of the most famous one, begun in 1961 by a determined, courageous team, whose quest for freedom and reconciliation with family and loved ones was all-consuming. The darkly atmospheric "Tunnel," originally shown on German television in 2001, is as deep and claustrophobic as the hole the group worked so intensely to excavate. Leading the grueling effort is Harry Melchior (Heino Ferch), the new East German swimming champion, whose four years of unjust imprisonment have reinforced his unrelenting anti-Communist beliefs. Refusing to continue competing for his country, he flees to the West as the borders are sealed. Because his sister and her family remain in the East, he prepares a daring rescue operation with the assistance of an engineer, Matthis, and an Italian-American, Vic (Sebastian Koch and Mehmet Kurtulus, in standout performances). They are joined by numerous volunteers hoping to rescue their own friends and family, and by the eager Fritzi (Nicolette Krebitz), whose solitary feminine presence complicates the team's relationships. The constant threat of capture or betrayal and a near-disastrous burst water pipe set the stage for a tension-filled drama. Tightly executed and packed with heroic moments, "The Tunnel" is only disengaging when the mechanics of the epic mission overshadow the characters. (It is possible that something was lost in the 30 minutes that were cut from the original television version.) In one poignant scene we witness two attractive young lovers tragically separated by the 12-inch-thick concrete Berlin Wall. One is dying from a gunshot wound, the other is helpless to reach him. In another scene, two members of the tunnel team discover that an out-of-place section of the wall is actually a prop from an American film being shot there. This alerts them to the outside interest in their plight, and they recruit NBC to provide a camera crew, and money, for their digging mission. Mr. Richter deftly intercuts grainy 16-millimeter black-and-white scenes to bring an immediacy to the inspiring material. By its breathless finale, "The Tunnel" has the emotional grip of the best prison-escape films. Here, the bars may be only metaphorical, except for the massive wall itself, but the film convincingly portrays the devastating, life-altering hardships and restrictions that the residents of the divided Berlin endured.

Based on the true story of the biggest underground escape attempt from East to West Berlin, "The Tunnel" is a cracking slice of old-fashioned, widescreen entertainment that deserves play beyond offshore TV. Conceived and shot like a feature film but actually financed and first shown as a telepic, the original three-hour version aired over two nights in January on SAT 1 and is already available in Germany on homevid. Current 160-minute theatrical cut, cleverly done, omits no scenes of major importance and more than stands up as a fully-fledged feature on the bigscreen.
Story limns the exploits of the real-life Hasso Herschel, here called Harry Melchior (Heino Ferch), an East German swimming champ who refuses to let his popularity be exploited by the government. After the Wall goes up in August '61, Harry escapes on a forged passport, joining previous escapee friend Matthis (Sebastian Koch) and the latter's two pals, Fred (Felix Eitner) and Italian-American Vic (Mehmet Kurtulus).
Desperate to bring over his sister, Lotte (Alexandra Maria Lara), Harry conceives the idea of clandestinely digging a huge tunnel, approximately 7 yards deep and 145 yards long, under the Wall, with the help of his three friends. The enormous enterprise, on which they're joined by the spunky Fritzi (Nicolette Krebitz), ends up taking a year and mushrooms into a mass exodus worthy of "The Great Escape."
Helmer Roland Suso Richter, again working with d.p. Martin Langer, shows a natural eye for well-honed widescreen drama, here given a grittier edge by color processing that's hard and cold. Period detail is natural and lived-in, with a real feel for '60s Berlin and the realities of having a wall dicing a city in half.
However, what ultimately gives "The Tunnel" the feel of a real movie rather than a telepic is Johannes W. Betz's well-crafted script, which balances believable character development alongside narrative drive. Betz manipulates a large number of story strands and personalities with deftness and no sense of haste (even in the trimmed version), and the physical set pieces -- various tunneling disasters, the over-the-wall escape of Fritzi's East German boyfriend, and the final tense reels -- never lose sight of character between the thrills. As a result, the final emotional payoff is considerable.
Thesps fully inhabit their roles, with Ferch physically commanding as Harry, Koch quiet but focused as engineer Matthis, and Uwe Kockisch bringing a malevolent charm to the part of East Berlin secret police chief Krueger. Other perfs are excellent down the line.
Camera (color, widescreen), Martin Langer; editor, Eva Schnare; music, Harald Kloser, Thomas Wanker; production designer, Michael Pfalzer; art director, Bettina Schmidt; costume designer, Astrid Karras; sound, Roland Winke; assistant director, Hellmut Fuls; casting, Rita Serra-Roll. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (market), Feb. 13, 2001. Running time: 160 MIN.
 


"Her personal life was intertwined with the Bolshevik revolution," intones the narrator of this no-frills doc on Nadezhda Alliluyev , who was 16 when she married the 39-year-old future despot in 1919. Best known for 1982's cult classic Liquid Sky , Slava Tsukerman  combines archival footage, interviews with scholars and relatives, and plummy voice-over to dutifully recap the short life of his subject.
Nadezhda met her husband-to-be as a child when her revolutionary father offered Stalin refuge upon his escape from prison in 1908; a few years later Nadezhda's mother had an affair with Stalin—described by one descendant as "a ladies' man." The teenage bride, who had been Lenin 's favorite stenographer, would spend her remaining years producing two children and watching her spouse transform into (in the words of one family friend) "a humanlike beast." Talking heads provide contradictory evidence as to whether Nadezhda killed herself or was murdered (perhaps by Stalin himself) in 1932. Others take the notion that the personal is political to the extreme: "Perhaps if another woman, with less spiritual demands, had been close to Stalin, things would have been different," suggests the dictator's grandson, referring to the barbarity that would ravage the Soviet Union . Yet Tsukerman is not interested in disproving or discounting theories, but merely assembling them.
