Five years after his feature debut, L.I.E. , with its molten core of suburban pedophilia, director Michael Cuesta returns to the world of dangers for preteens in nice houses with 12 and Holding . And this second visit, with its insistence on extremes of sexuality, violence, and cartoon obesity (an adolescent girl with a crush on a grown man dresses like a Desperate Housewife; the acts of bullies lead to tragedy; a fat kid resents his even fatter parents), makes Cuesta's interest seem more obsessive than artistically daring. The young cast is terrific, giving the stories unearned weight.

 One of the most intriguing (and persuasive) descriptions of how we grow compares our storage of memories, dreams and sensations to the information found on the concentric layers of a redwood tree. Experiences we assimilated at 3, 10, 17, 30,   whatever age: they're all  in a living archive, like the rings of a tree trunk.  Michael Cuesta's film "12 and Holding" flashes a laser beam on a particular ring: the moment between childhood and adolescence when unguarded emotions and fantasies still rule, but adult experience beckons. Until the very end of this poignant, beautifully acted film, when one of its three interwoven stories stretches credibility beyond the breaking point, it allows you to relive  the raw feelings of your 12-year-old self. If you were a sensitive, suburban middle-class geek, that experience could be especially uncomfortable and revelatory.  The film "12 and Holding" explores roughly the same territory Mr. Cuesta covered in his debut project, "L.I.E.," a cleareyed study of alienated Long Island teenagers that broached the subjects of pedophilia and teenage male prostitution.  Mr. Cuesta was one of three screenwriters for "L.I.E."; "12 and Holding" was directed from a first screenplay by Anthony S. Cipriano that is similarly fearless and empathetic with its young subjects.  The movie begins with the kind of shocking event that a typical film about childhood would reserve for much later. Two bullies retaliate against the boys who doused them with a pail of urine dumped from their treehouse. Returning at night with Molotov cocktails, the bullies set it on fire, unaware that it is occupied.  Scrambling to safety from the flames, one of the two tree dwellers, Rudy Carges (Conor Donovan), falls to his death. The other, Leonard Fisher (Jesse Camacho), suffers minor injuries and loses his sense of taste. To the fury of Rudy's parents, Jim (Linus Roache) and Ashley (Jayne Atkinson), the under-age arsonists receive sentences of only one year in juvenile hall and five years' probation.  Rudy's traumatized identical twin, Jacob (also played by Mr. Donovan), would have been in the treehouse had he not balked at the last minute and remained at home. Jacob, unlike Rudy, has a large purple birthmark on one side of his face, which he obscures under a hockey mask. The blemish has left him feeling less loved by his parents, especially his mother, who stews in a murderous fury at the light punishment.  Following Rudy's death, Jacob visits the juvenile prison holding the arsonists and  hurls violent revenge fantasies at one of them, Kenny (Michael Fuchs). But he keeps returning, and over the months a wary  friendship develops between them, partly because in that time Jacob is Kenny's only visitor.  Jacob belongs to a group of three friends, all from the ranks of the uncool, who huddle together for emotional support. Leonard is so obese that his inability to do a single chin-up in gym class prompts his junior high phys ed teacher to pronounce him the most out-of-shape child he has ever met. His life begins to change when that teacher hands him books on nutrition and exercise, and he begins to run.  When Leonard refuses to continue eating the fattening meals cooked by his dangerously obese mother, Grace (Marcia Debonis), she feels threatened and resentful. Out of concern for her health, he eventually takes desperate measures to force her to change her diet. If these scenes are the closest the movie comes to laugh-out-loud comedy, they have a sharply bitter undertone.  Malee Chuang (Zoë Weizenbaum), the third member of the triumvirate, is the pretty half-Asian only child of Carla (Annabella Sciorra), an angry divorced psychotherapist whose ex-husband has no interest in his child. Starved for a father, the girl develops a romantic fixation on Gus Maitland (Jeremy Renner), a former firefighter being treated for depression by Carla.  Malee takes picnic lunches to the construction site where Gus works and even snoops inside his house. Eavesdropping on his therapy sessions, she hears  of his obsession with a Blue Oyster Cult song, which she learns and performs (in another sad/funny moment) at a school talent show he attends. To tempt him into a relationship, she also begins dressing provocatively and wearing makeup.  This is the exceedingly rare film that understands how lonely, insecure preadolescent children can become so consumed by their feelings that they lose sight of ordinary boundaries and unconsciously act out their parents' darkest fantasies of passion and revenge. The movie wastes no time as it shuttles from one drama to another. It also loves its characters.  By observing children's interactions with adults from an emotional perspective that's closer to 12 than 35, it blurs the lines between  child and adult. Grown-up emotions may not be as urgent as those felt by children, but they're essentially the same feelings of pain, longing and rage.  "12 and Holding" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has strong language, a scene of arson and an unusual candor about childhood sexuality.

Michael Cuesta's first feature since 2001's striking debut "L.I.E." is quite different in tone and style, but sports considerable overlap. Again, Cuesta's pic deals in sometimes queasy areas of underage sexuality and emotional extremes; again, deftness and confidence ultimately put across a screenplay (this time by Anthony S. Cipriano) overloaded with sensational incident. Less-obvious controversy and marketing points will make this harder to place commercially, though it certainly deserves the kind of modest theatrical exposure given such other intelligent recent Amerindie studies of childhood as "Mean Creek" and "Mysterious Skin."
While the cause of his skittishness isn't evident right away -- the hockey mask he's just gotten as a gift hides a birthmark covering half his face -- it's immediately clear 12-year-old Jacob Carges has a completely different personality than his athletic, outgoing twin Rudy (Conor Donovan, playing both roles). Rudy is the ringleader of a quartet of classmates that hangs out in woods behind their suburban neighborhood, one that also includes precocious Malee (Zoe Weizenbaum) and tubby, insecure Leonard (Jesse Camacho). 
When the Carges boys dump a bucketful of urine on the local bully-brothers, latter toughs swear they'll return that night to destroy the foursome's tree house. But when the time comes, Jacob shrinks from joining Rudy and Leonard as they sneak out to guard the fort. The bad boys arrive on schedule, unaware their foes are asleep in the tree structure, which they torch. Leonard tumbles to safety, but Rudy is killed, throwing his family, friends and whole community into grieving disbelief.
This occurs just as the kids are entering adolescence, further complicating an already bewildering period in their lives. Jacob is haunted by guilt, frustrated by his parents' falling apart (Rudy was the clear favorite), and perversely driven to visit the guilty boys in juvenile lockup. These trips, at first motivated by hatred, develop into a friendship of sorts with one of the boys. 
Meanwhile, Malee and Leonard are also dealing with their own -- frequently seriocomic --issues, which include grief, growth and family. 
Cuesta and Cipriano juggle a lot of narrative and tonal elements; the movie sometimes grows precarious from the weight of too many crises and hairpin turns from comedy to drama. But both script and direction are ultimately up to the task, trumping occasional improbability with sharp observation. An overall edge of hyper reality -- akin to Todd Solondz's, if less cruel -- lends the pic enough authorial distance to let its more over-the-top incidents be taken at less than full face value. This is especially helpful at the end, when a second killing occurs that might overwhelm a less intricately balanced film.
Young leads are terrific, adults in support roles of variable screentime equally strong. Tech and design elements are spot-on, making the best of a tight budget.

Like his first feature L.I.E. —and like half of the glib provocations that tumble off the indie assembly line—Michael Cuesta 's Twelve and Holding  is a sneering inquiry into the florid dysfunction that lurks deep in leafiest suburbia. Striking in both its confidence and its incoherence, L.I.E.  detailed the queasy platonic relationship between a pretty, neglected teenage boy and the kindly neighborhood pederast. Cuesta's new poisoned valentine to adolescence, a tragicomedy of pubertal acting out, is likewise premised on the clueless self-involvement of parents and the innate wisdom of children.
Punctuated by the gluttonous commemorations of various American holidays, the movie opens with a vicious act of juvenile retribution on the Fourth of July. Two bullies toss a flaming cocktail into their sworn enemies' treehouse, killing 12-year-old Rudy. The dead boy's sullen twin brother, Jacob (Conor Donovan , playing both roles), copes by visiting the juvenile detention center, plotting revenge on—and bonding with—one of the killers. His stunned parents (Linus Roache  and Jayne Atkinson ) are of little help—Jacob's status as less favored twin is signified by his port-wine stain birthmark, which he often conceals behind a hockey mask.
The brothers' two close friends, facing elaborate complications of their own, provide mild pathos and broad humor: Lonely Malee (Zoe Weizenbaum ) develops an age-inappropriate crush on a construction worker (Jeremy Renner ); the bemused stud happens to be a patient of her mother (Annabella Sciorra ), a distracted shrink and embittered divorcée. In the most grotesque subplot, overweight Leonard (Jesse Camacho ), injured in the accident that killed Rudy, loses his sense of taste and smell, and to the horror of his obese family, embarks on a fruit and vegetable diet.
To call Twelve and Holding  cartoonish is to put it mildly. Marked by reckless tonal shifts, Anthony Cipriano 's screenplay traffics in sensationalism and sentimentality. Its treatment of adolescent sexuality, especially in comparison with last year's Mysterious Skin , is at once self-congratulatory and squeamish. (It takes a certain sick humor to position Renner, who first attracted attention for playing Jeffrey Dahmer  in a 2002 biopic, as an object of underage lust.) That said, the movie is on the whole pleasingly populated with underused pros like Sciorra and Roache. And as he demonstrated in L.I.E. , Cuesta has a real skill—or maybe a perverse gift—for coaxing persuasive performances from young actors, never mind how nonsensical the role or contrived the situation. The pint-size cast lends some credence to a self-canceling mode that scans as humane Todd Solondz . But look closer—as this film's most obvious forerunner, American Beauty , advised—and an uglier logic emerges. In Cuesta's cynical formulation, the pretense of empathy is simply license to mock, gawk, and vulgarize.
