I tend to bristle whenever a new film gets compared to ''a '70s movie,'' as if an era defined by its rambling unpredictability of form can now be reduced to a mere genre. But James Gray's Two Lovers  really is a '70s movie, in the mode of such raw, unfiltered character studies as The Panic in Needle Park , Wanda , and Fat City . You have to watch it with different brain muscles than you’re used to using, because the film has no frills or hooks, no visible ''arcs,'' nothing to grab on to but the fragile humanity of the people on screen. In the case of Leonard (Joaquin Phoenix), a surly, stunted fellow living with his Orthodox Jewish parents in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn, that humanity is notably vulnerable. Mopey, sallow, and nearly mute (the film opens with his half-hearted suicide attempt), Leonard seems a fatally broken man. But Phoenix, in a feat of acting that keeps revealing new layers, gives him mordant flashes of insight and sex appeal.
As his spirit awakens, so does the movie. Leonard gets set up with Sandra (Vinessa Shaw), the lovely daughter of the man buying out his family's dry-cleaning business, and she's just sensitive enough to take to his morose charm. But he also hears the siren song of another—the sweet, gorgeous, deeply troubled Michelle (Gwyneth Paltrow), who has moved into his building. In outline, this love triangle is like something out of early Philip Roth, and it proves far more potent than anything in Gray's earlier, '70s-inflected genre films (We Own the Night , The Yards , and Little Odessa ). Paltrow, as she did in Sylvia , makes neurosis luminescent, and Phoenix does something mesmerizing: He plays Leonard as a romantic who is literally engaged, via Michelle, in the adoration of damage. Two Lovers  left me hoping that Phoenix, who has announced his retirement from acting, comes to realize that may be the worst decision he has ever made. A–

 “Two Lovers” deals with the romantic ambivalence of a young man in Brooklyn, a description that might set visions of mumblecore dancing in your head. But this movie, the director James Gray’s fourth feature (after “Little Odessa,” “The Yards” and “We Own the Night”), is not another low-key, closely observed study in bohemian diffidence. It takes place in Brighton Beach, many subway stops (and sociological light years) from the northwestern sections of the borough, where the hipsters roam. And its palette of emotions, like its rich and somber 35-millimeter cinematography, departs from the hand-held, hi-def, discursive style associated with directors like Joe Swanberg and Aaron Katz, harking back to an older, artistically more conservative film tradition of lush, earnest melodrama.  The story Mr. Gray has to tell (he wrote the screenplay with Richard Menello) is modest in scale, but the feelings that run through it are large and intense. And why shouldn’t they be? The life of Leonard Kraditor might seem ordinary, even drab — he lives with his parents, works for his father’s dry-cleaning business, dabbles in photography — but his desires and sorrows, his fundamental confusion about who he should be, certainly don’t feel trivial to him. Hardly a feckless youth, Leonard is in his early 30s, with a breakup and a breakdown (involving a suicide attempt) just behind him. Played with twitchy sensitivity by Joaquin Phoenix, Leonard is by turns raw and benumbed, at once comforted and smothered by the homey claustrophobia of life with his tactful old-world dad (Moni Moshonov) and his hovering, anxious mother (Isabella Rossellini).  Though it is set in the present, “Two Lovers” takes place in what often feels like an earlier incarnation of New York, a world of lower-middle-class neighborhoods and workaday aspirations that is still very real but that seems less interesting to ambitious filmmakers and writers than it used to be. Leonard’s literary and cinematic kinsmen are guys like Ernest Borgnine’s lonely Bronx butcher in “Marty” and the libidinous, insecure strivers who populate the early fiction of Philip Roth.  Like a Roth hero — and just about every other American Jewish male protagonist from Augie March to Jerry Seinfeld — he struggles with the conflicting demands of filial duty and the longing to strike out on his own. He wants to be a good son, but he also wants to live a life of danger, freedom and impulse. Does he stick with his own kind and risk suffocation, or does he risk rootlessness in pursuit of liberation?  These choices are hardly abstract. They are embodied by two women who contend for Leonard’s attention and affection and who also, to some extent, conform to the ancient archetypes identified by the literary critic Leslie Fiedler of the Good Good Girl and the Good Bad Girl. Vinessa Shaw plays Sandra, the girl Leonard might have brought home to mother if mother hadn’t brought her home first. She’s the daughter of an important business associate of Leonard’s father, and if she and Leonard paired off, there would be advantages all around. Luckily for Leonard, Sandra is also kind, smart, patient and very sexy.  But he can’t help but be distracted by Michelle (Gwyneth Paltrow), a willowy blonde who turns up, to Leonard’s amazement and his mother’s undisguised horror, in their apartment building. Michelle is an exotic transplant in the outer-borough soil, filling Leonard’s nose with the Manhattany perfume of sophistication and sexual adventure. She is also needy, capricious and a little unstable, which allows Leonard’s fantasy of escape to be twinned with a dream of rescue. Michelle is the mistress of a rich, married lawyer (Elias Koteas), and she turns to Leonard as a brotherly confidant even as her vulnerability seems to offer the chance for something more.  Structurally “Two Lovers” is a romantic comedy, with complications and misunderstandings accelerating toward a big decision. But while there are moments of humor — and a sublimely witty, almost surreal performance from Ms. Rossellini — the overall mood is earnest and anguished. The picture’s basic conflict is one Mr. Gray has explored before: the tension between the individual spirit and the ways of the tribe. But previously the tribalism has been that of gangsters or cops, and has been worked out through the violent rituals of the urban crime genre, where sentimentality grows out of the barrel of a gun.  It can be argued that with “Two Lovers” Mr. Gray has traded in one set of clichés for another. But perhaps because the conventions of romantic melodrama have lain dormant for so long, there is something fresh and vivid about the way he uses them here. He is also a generous and sympathetic director of actors, and he makes the most of Ms. Shaw’s grace, Ms. Paltrow’s unpredictability and Mr. Phoenix’s odd, intriguing blend of solemnity and mischief. Their performances go a long way toward preventing the movie from becoming overwrought or schematic.  It’s a little of both, to tell the truth. But the flaws in “Two Lovers” are inseparable from its strengths. You could, I suppose, criticize the movie for being too sincere; too generous to its imperfect, self-deluded characters; too absorbed in their small crises and disproportionate reactions. But that criticism might sound a lot like praise.  “Two Lovers” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for language, some sexuality and brief drug use.

An involving, ultimately touching romantic drama about a young man's struggle deciding between the two women in his life, "Two Lovers" reps a welcome change of pace for director James Gray from his run of crime mellers. Well acted by Joaquin Phoenix, Gwyneth Paltrow and Vinessa Shaw, this very New York tale is old-fashioned in good ways that have to do with solid storytelling, craftsmanship and emotional acuity. Developing an audience will be another matter altogether; its central romantic dynamic would be entirely accessible to a mass audience, but pic's smallish nature and lack of real B.O. names suggest that interest will need to be built among discerning viewers via fest exposure and critical support, leading into gradual platform release by a dedicated distrib.
Gray developed a following, among some Yank cinephiles but far more widely in France, with three Gotham-set crime dramas, "Little Odessa," "The Yards" and last year's Cannes entry "We Own the Night." But opinions of those films have little bearing on what one's reaction to "Two Lovers" will be, as its intent, emotional temperature and accomplishment are quite different.
Inspired in part by Dostoevsky's story "White Nights," Gray and co-scripter Richard Menello have cooked up a contemporary love story that could have taken place anytime; except for the characters' addiction to cellphones and one use of a computer, the film almost has a '50s feel, especially in the interchange among friends and neighbors and in how two of the characters interrelate between windows across a courtyard.
At the film's heart is the eternal and vexing conflict a man can feel over pursuing a bewitching, sexually fascinating neurotic and choosing a good, attractive but less mysterious woman who's the more sensible partner. Not that the man is such a winner himself. Leonard Kraditor (Phoenix) has recently moved back into his parents' modestly comfortable Brighton Beach apartment after a cancelled engagement to a woman he loved. On meds for a bipolar condition, Leonard is a sometimes diffident guy who dabbles in photography but works at his dad's dry cleaning establishment, a business that soon may be merged into a small chain owned by the Cohen family.
It's through these family negotiations that Leonard meets Sandra Cohen (Shaw), an open, seemingly uncomplicated young lady who makes no secret of her interest in Leonard, an interest he soon takes advantage of. Perhaps the only little smirk the film provokes is having two such gorgeous women as Sandra and new neighbor Michelle (Paltrow) virtually fall into moody Leonard's lap almost simultaneously.
Sandra is someone Leonard is familiar with, like family, while Michelle is something else again; tall, blond and a bit unhealthy looking, the vivacious lady mesmerizes Leonard, especially as he can easily glimpse her through her apartment window across the way. He thinks he's as good as closed the deal when she invites him to join her and two girlfriends for a night of clubbing and takes Ecstasy in the car on the way, so he's later crushed to learn that she's got a rich boyfriend who's married with kids.
But this is just the beginning of Michelle's manipulations; she's the type of woman with an unerring talent for requesting something of the men in her life when the timing is most inconvenient. Willing to stand Sandra up whenever Michelle calls, Leonard agrees to go on a weird dinner date with her and her b.f. Ronald (Elias Koteas), so that he can make a judgment as to whether he'll ever leave his family for her -- all this, of course, while Leonard is dying to get Michelle for himself. It all becomes markedly more complicated and wrenching for all parties until the final reckoning, which is handled with an estimable degree of tact, delicacy and honesty, to quite moving effect.
Phoenix, who appeared in "The Yards" and "We Own the Night," deftly conveys Leonard's complicated mix of personality traits; he's shifty, selfish, vulnerable, uncertain and keen to love someone again. Because of this combination and his lack of clear ambition, one is never sure what kind of decisions Leonard is apt to make, which builds interest and suspense over his fate. Paltrow very accurately captures the sort of toxic catnip men often lose their heads over, while Shaw, usually cast as a bombshell, here puts fine shadings on a nice Jewish girl whose favorite movie is "The Sound of Music," which she insists is "underrated."
Koteas registers sharply as a man on an emotional tightrope, while Moni Monoshov and Isabella Rossellini warmly embody Leonard's good-hearted parents.
A major pleasure is the sure-handed use of particular New York locations, both in Brooklyn and Manhattan, that serve the story resonant ways. Tech contributions are strong in a traditional style.

Martin Scorsese won't need to put his imprimatur on James Gray's Two Lovers —the French film press has already taken care of that. Populated by cops and petty criminals, typically set in and around Brighton Beach's immigrant community, Gray's downbeat family sagas have inspired Gallic critics to anoint him "le Scorsese russe ."
Two Lovers , which had an ecstatic world premiere in Cannes last May, is something of a departure for the 39-year-old director—a switch from the posturing gangsta grit of Little Odessa , The Yards , and We Own the Night  to wacky romantic drama. Still constant, however, are the suffocating family atmosphere and tone-deaf repartee. Gray's frequent leading man, Joaquin Phoenix, here plays Leonard Kraditor, a bipolar would-be photographer, released from the bin back to his family's Brighton Beach nest. A wiseacre like Adam Sandler might have brought an edgy element of delusional grandiosity to this tragic asshole, who, devastated by a broken engagement and forever poised on the brink of hurling himself into Sheepshead Bay, is persecuted by a clinically paranoid mother (Isabella Rossellini, playing "Jewish" with all the shrillness she can muster). Phoenix is more the depressed Hamlet, torn between the comely, unaccountably understanding JAP, Sandra Cohen (Vinessa Shaw), who his parents are promoting—her father owns a chain of dry cleaners and is prepared to take Leonard into the business—and the crazy shiksa, Michelle Rausch (Gwyneth Paltrow), conveniently stashed next door by a married lover (Elias Koteas).
The performers are attractive if unconvincing. The auteur's worldview is unappealing yet authentically his. The movie's most heartfelt aspects are a drearily excessive bar mitzvah, the disgusting close-ups of mom's home cooking, and the Kraditor apartment's laboriously ethnographic mise-en-scène. "Ee-ew, what's that thing?" Michelle asks, pointing to the family dreidel. Sandra is also clueless, albeit in a nice way. Her favorite movie, she tells Leonard, is The Sound of Music.  Before you can say, "Doe, a deer," he manages to engage this goody-goody in sex made all the more incestuous by the presence of their parents kibitzing around the dinner table a few yards away. Love with Michelle is a lot wilder, shifting from late-December rooftop canoodling to total insanity once Leonard goes off his meds. Touching in its absurdity, the movie is what the French, if they didn't love Gray so much, might term agréablement ridicule .
jhoberman@villagevoice.com
