         "Two Weeks," written and directed by Steve Stockman, is the story of a woman dying from ovarian cancer and her four adult children as they gather at her Wilmington, N.C., home for what they believe to be her final days. The loss of a parent is difficult under any circumstances, and a movie that dares to take on the situation as its premise enters territory where maudlin and saccharine are common enemies.
 
  Stockman, a veteran of TV commercials making his feature debut, mostly avoids those two pitfalls but otherwise stumbles in his attempt to deal with this complex emotional scenario. Despite striking a chord in terms of sibling politics and the inelegant ways we deal with death, "Two Weeks" too often feels as if it's destined for heavy rotation on the Lifetime Movie Network.
 


         






    And though the movie is being released for a one-week Oscar qualifying run — seemingly pegged entirely to the performance of Sally Field, whom academy voters have liked well enough in the past to twice vote her best actress — it is unlikely the electorate will respond to (or even notice) "Two Weeks" amid the year-end logjam of films.
 
  Field is perfectly fine as the doomed Anita Bergman, but the understated role seems artificially inflated by interspersed clips in which Anita's eldest son, Keith, a Hollywood filmmaker, interviews her for posterity. The segments do little to advance the story other than providing clunky exposition, which in some cases is at odds with what's going on in the movie.
 
  Ben Chaplin plays Keith, the de facto protagonist, a rumpled, Zen-spouting, recovering alcoholic whose siblings ridicule him for eating tofu dogs. Keith's desire to remain detached is at odds with his dutiful sister, Emily (Julianne Nicholson), who has been devotedly on the scene for a while before she picks up Keith from the airport and plies him with texts from the death and dying section of the local bookstore.
 
  The second brother, Barry (Tom Cavanagh, TV's "Ed"), a slick corporate type, impatiently arrives, expecting to make a quick exit, barely pausing to acknowledge his mother while perpetually talking business on his Bluetooth headset. Rounding out the quartet is younger brother Matthew (Glenn Howerton), who feels his older siblings don't take him seriously.
 
  Needless to say, the reunion stretches out to the titular fortnight as the siblings attempt to comfort Mom and abide by her wishes to evenly divvy up the family heirlooms. James Murtaugh co-stars as Jim, Anita's second husband, whose growing annoyance with his stepchildren soon becomes something with which the audience can identify.
 
  The characters remain undeveloped and in the cases of Keith and Barry are little more than archetypes. Poor Matthew barely registers at all. And though almost everything interesting we learn about Emily comes via her mother's interview, Nicholson makes her the film's most grounded and compelling character.
 
  Dramatically, the movie lacks focus, unfolding in episodic spurts in which the family bickers as prologue to their coming grief. The midsection of the film must have been cut severely because there is a flurry of secondary characters (including a cameo by Clea DuVall as Matthew's obnoxious wife), whose appearances in the film have little or no dramatic value.
 
  Stockman's awkward attempts to inject dark humor into the proceedings are labored, and the banter is bland or sitcomish. The result is an ineffective would-be tear-jerker that proves the adage "dying is easy, comedy is hard."
 
 
  MPAA rating: R for language, including some sexual references. Running time: 1 hour, 38 minutes. Exclusively at the AMC Century City 15, 10250 Santa Monica Blvd. (310) 289-4AMC.   


A family's final days with their dying mother generates an indifferent emotional experience in "Two Weeks." With Sally Field as the cancer-ridden mom and the combined talents of Ben Chaplin, Julianne Nicholson and Tom Cavanagh surrounding her, pic veers unsteadily between melodrama and light comedy, with no confidence in either. This marks a curious pickup for MGM as an awards-season qualifier, since it will quickly pass on to the great beyond of vid and cable. 
Field's recent renewed visibility, stoked by her lead as matriarch on the TV series "Brothers and Sisters," should theoretically boost the film's profile after its Hamptons fest premiere in October. But any randomly selected minutes of that rather wan family drama are better than whole chunks of tyro writer-producer-director Steve Stockman's account of how siblings react to their mom's dying and to each other in "Two Weeks."
As the two weeks begin, Anita Bergman (Field) is bed-ridden at her home in North Carolina, with her second husband, Jim (James Murtaugh), apparently unable or unwilling to take charge of her care. This falls mainly to her responsible, serious daughter Emily (Julianne Nicholson), who then asks her brothers Barry (Cavanagh), Keith (Chaplin) and Matthew (Glenn Howerton) to join her at the family home. (Anita's first husband, briefly mentioned, is literally out of the picture.)
Inserted awkwardly into the 14-day cycle are clips from Keith's video recording/interview of Anita, answering his questions about her life and the family. Narrative device -- literally outlining the story's topics -- establishes Keith as a "Hollywood" type, though it's never clear what he actually does in the film industry, just as it's never clear when exactly Keith recorded Anita, since she's much healthier and more energetic in front of his camera than in her final weeks.
Indeed, much of Field's speaking perf is in the vid segments, since her character is comatose for pic's latter half. Outside of a scene where she insists on coming to the dinner table to chew and spit up some spare ribs (since she can't digest food), and a sojourn at the beach, Anita's character becomes mere background to the sibling squabbling.
And squabble they do, though rarely convincingly. Stuck between Emily and her bevy of how-to manuals on the dying process and Barry's go-getter attitude as a hustling corporate guy, Keith apparently is unsure of himself and his relations with loved ones, while the youngest, Matthew, feels marginalized by his siblings' open contempt of his self-centered wife (Clea Duvall).
A series of small incidents --including forging documents to get mom's savings out of the bank -- do nothing to bring clarity to Keith's unfocused character, and advance the sense that the movie has no real idea of what works as either comedy or tragedy.
None of this helps Chaplin, whose own lack of verve or quirks project a bland profile. Field plays sick with conviction, but her monologues to Keith's camera lack force.
Nicholson, on a roll since her stunning work in "Flannel Pajamas," invests Emily with a lived-in quality that sets her apart from the rest of the cast, including Cavanagh in another variation on his usual deadpan manner.
Vid-shot production, though pro in all departments, couldn't look plainer. MPAA's bizarre rating of R (for language and supposed sexual references) seems extremely harsh and unwarranted.
Pic was screened for critics on tele-cine video, preventing any judgment of Stephen Kazmierski's HD vid cinematography.
