The term isn't generally applied to the subject of a nonfiction film, but ''starring'' is the right description for Mike Tyson's participation in James Toback's provocatively sympathetic, impressionistic documentary portrait, Tyson . With the security of a friendly filmmaker in his corner (Toback, with his fondness for indulging male characters who come on strong, has cast the former boxer in two previous films), the famous and at times infamous Tyson gets to tell his complicated, uneasy life story his way. He talks about the mystery of being Iron Mike in long, compelling stretches of monologue, shot up close to enhance the dramatic contrast of the soft, lisping voice emerging from the big, tattooed head, calmly confessing to bad stuff, especially when it comes to women.
Toback then slices and stylizes these riffs in his own version of fight choreography, inserting archival footage from the ring and combining split screen repetitions of the subject's own hulking presence with overlapping repetitions of Tyson's own sing-songy, intermittently self-aware words. The result is flashy, but the meaning is a bit of a bob and weave. Tyson  draws no conclusions about the former heavyweight champion who's as famous for his 1992 rape conviction and subsequent prison term as for his prowess in the ring, except that he's a potent puncher, a damaged man, and a handsome object for the camera's gaze. B–
See all current movie reviews from EW

 The first thing you see in “Tyson,” James Toback’s powerful and troubling new documentary, is an old television clip showing Mike Tyson, on Nov. 22, 1986, defeating Trevor Berbick to win the W.B.C. heavyweight title. Just 20 years old, Mr. Tyson was the youngest fighter to win that belt, and to see him take it is to recall, especially in light of the shambling, thuggish caricature he would later become, what a dazzling and ferocious boxer he was in his prime.  The only thing more astonishing than the speed of his combinations was their force, and his ability to blend quickness with brute strength quickly overpowered his early opponents, not many of whom lasted very long in the ring with him. Mr. Berbick, a taller, heavier and more experienced fighter, was done before the second round was over, and what the slow-motion video shows most indelibly is the terror on his face before the referee mercifully called a TKO.  The essence of boxing is violence, but few fighters have refined it — have embodied it —  quite as effectively as Mr. Tyson has; he sometimes speaks to Mr. Toback’s camera about the murderous clarity he took into the ring with him. He says he used to imagine his fists smashing through his opponent’s faces and out the backs of their heads. The pure terror in Mr. Berbick’s eyes (and in those of most of the other fighters Mr. Tyson met during his rapid rise and brief reign) suggests that he might well have been capable of wreaking that kind of damage.  But the damage surveyed in “Tyson” is mostly self-inflicted. Fear is certainly one of the film’s motifs, but it seems that Mr. Tyson suffers from at least as much as he inspires. “I’m afraid. I’m afraid. I’m afraid,” he says at one point, giving voice to his state of mind in the moments before a bout. He also remembers being bullied and humiliated as a child in Brooklyn, but in listening to his moody, rambling and frequently thoughtful disquisitions on his own life you are struck by intimations of a dread much deeper than the fear of physical harm or loss of face.  With a single exception — his relationship with his trainer and mentor, Cus D’Amato — Mr. Tyson’s experience of the world has been marked by mistrust and suspicion, by a view of other people that is hard and pitiless. They are users, operators, “leeches,” he says, but he rarely claims to be any better. He is only human.  Most of the movie consists of the former champ sitting in a house near the Pacific Ocean, speaking into the camera as if no one else were around. This produces an effect of almost unnerving intimacy — it is a bit scary to be so close to him — but also an upwelling, perhaps unexpected, of compassion. It is hard to imagine anyone more radically alone.  Whether or not he deserves our sympathy is a fair question. It is easy, and not entirely unjustified, to look at Mr. Tyson, his left eye ringed by a Maori tattoo, his head shaved clean, and see a self-pitying, self-justifying man who squandered his talent and good fortune and caused much more hurt than his brutal profession required. He started out as a street criminal in Brownsville, Brooklyn, and was plucked from juvenile detention by Mr. D’Amato and his associates, who disciplined the young man’s natural volatility and turned him into a fighter.  But Mr. Tyson never learned to control his brutish, self-destructive instincts. His brief first marriage, to the actress and model Robin Givens, was marked by accusations of abuse, and in 1993 he went to prison after being convicted of sexually assaulting a beauty pageant contestant in Indiana. By now he may be better known for ranting and press conferences and for biting Evander Holyfield’s ear during a 1997 fight than for the mighty pugilistic feats of his youth.  And a lot of people, even passionate boxing fans, might prefer to forget about Mr. Tyson rather than spend 90 minutes in his company. But “Tyson” is worth seeing even if you have no particular interest in the sport or the man.  It may lack the detachment and the balance that Barbara Kopple brought to “Fallen Champ: The Untold Story of Mike Tyson,” the 1993 documentary she made for NBC, but Mr. Toback’s film, partly because it restricts itself to Mr. Tyson’s point of view, offers a rare and vivid study in the complexity of a single suffering, raging soul. It is not an entirely trustworthy movie, but it does feel profoundly honest.  From time to time the screen is divided into two or three almost identical images, and the sound is edited to make it sound as if Mr. Tyson is in dialogue with himself, his words echoing and overlapping. These effects emphasize the film’s main point, which is that Mr. Tyson is too mercurial, too self-contradictory, to be easily summed up.  He is by turns boastful, angry, remorseful and bewildered, choking up when he recalls Mr. D’Amato, whose death in 1985 remains the central tragedy of Mr. Tyson’s life. He relates the details of that life with candor and feeling, and also with an analytical ardor that is moving because it reveals his struggle to figure himself out.  Without the sympathetic presence of Mr. Toback, whom he has known for many years, it is unlikely that Mr. Tyson would have opened up in this way. And it is also likely that without Mr. Tyson’s presence, the director would have been unlikely to restrain his own self-indulgent impulses.  Mr. Toback’s fascination with hyperbolic visions of masculinity predates his filmmaking career, going back at least to a notorious 1967 essay  on Norman Mailer. As a screenwriter and director — from “Fingers” to “Harvard Man” — he has been preoccupied with brutality, vanity and sexual conquest, and with the interplay between those elemental impulses and the refinements of art and culture.  His protagonists tend to be variously romanticized versions of himself:  intellectuals seduced by fantasies of crime, risk, sexual wantonness and violence. Even in his most interesting projects he frequently loses track of the difference between exploring such fantasies and indulging them, but in “Tyson,” his first nonfiction film, he is held in check by the irreducible, excruciating realness of the man in front of the camera. The transaction between them is charged with a strange kind of magic. The filmmaker allows the fighter to have his unchallenged say to justify, condemn and contradict himself. In exchange Mr. Tyson has enabled Mr. Toback to make his best film, which is also, paradoxically, his most personal.  “Tyson” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).  It has profanity and violence.

Those who think of Mike Tyson as just an animal unleashed upon an unsuspecting world should welcome the alternative perspective provided by "Tyson," James Toback's revelatory closeup look at the tumultuous life of the former heavyweight champ. Although straightforward in format, the film capitalizes on an obviously intense connection between filmmaker and subject with psychological acuity and emotional power. Sports fans will get their fill, but the pic's sensitivity to its exceedingly complicated subject opens up broader commercial horizons in theatrical, TV and homevid worldwide.
Making his second documentary, after 1990's "The Big Bang," Toback draws on his long friendship with the boxer (who appeared in Toback's 1999 feature "Black and White") by knowing where to probe and how to draw out the famously explosive athlete, even on the touchiest topics. Tyson seems like an open book here, willing to explore every aspect of his life, his painful and embarrassing missteps along with his extraordinary triumphs. The extent of the man's thoughtfulness, self-awareness and hidden fears will surprise many, most of all non-fans who thought they had him pegged.
In this complex portrait, which never pretends to be "objective" by offering others' views of the subject, Tyson comes close to seeming like a multiple-personality case -- he's bright but untutored, childlike but brutish, naive but pensive, emotionally needy, excessive in all aspects of his life and, most impressively, willing to take responsibility for everything that's happened to him -- everything, that is, except the rape charge that landed him in prison for three years, something he swears innocence of and that still riles him like nothing else.
Interviewed from multiple angles (sometimes in '60s-style split-screen) and in different settings, Tyson early on reveals how, as a little kid on Brooklyn's meanest streets, he was robbed and humiliated by older boys. At the time, he was too scared to fight back, and admits, "I'm afraid of being that way again." 
Not long after, however, he was so infuriated when a thug gratuitously killed one of his pet pigeons that Tyson went wild and beat the kid up. The docu covers some well-worn ground -- introduced to boxing at age 12 in juvee, Tyson had the great fortune to be taken under wing by legendary fight trainer Cus D'Amato, who became the father the boy never had -- and adds some wonderful early '80s homevideo footage, which amplifies the verbal impression Tyson offers of D'Amato as a veritable Michelangelo who took the raw material offered by Tyson's physique and sculpted it into a pugilistic masterpiece.
D'Amato helped Tyson master the mental side of the game. Whatever private fears Tyson may have harbored, one notices in the fight footage that he always psychologically dominated his opponents from the moment he stepped into the ring. Even now, Tyson chokes up when speaking of what D'Amato meant to him, which is just one of several moving interludes the picture delivers. 
D'Amato passed away in 1985, a year before Tyson demolished Trevor Berbick to become, at 20, the youngest man ever to win the heavyweight championship.
But while no man was tough enough to take Tyson for some time, his Achilles' heel proved to be women, a subject Toback gets his subject to address with seeming frankness. Allowing that, while D'Amato was still alive, he had followed the traditional fighters' rule of abstaining from sex prior to a fight, Tyson admits he was suffering from gonorrhea contracted from a prostitute when he fought Berbick and that his hyperactivity with women in Japan, combined with insufficient training, contributed to his first loss, to Buster Douglas, in 1990. 
In between had been his eight-month marriage to actress Robin Givens ("We were just kids") and a developing taste for strong women he enjoyed dominating sexually. Given his many moods and physical prowess, one could believe Tyson as capable of almost anything, but in context here, the rape case seems out of character. Angry for the only time in the film, he calls out his accuser, Desiree Washington, and says his bitterness over the episode led him never to trust anyone.
Adding to Tyson's subsequent woes were a falling out with promoter Don King, who he says "would kill his mother for a dollar," and terrible PR stemming from his ferocious bouts with Evander Holyfield, during the second of which he bit off a piece of his opponent's ear. His finances in tatters and his heart no longer in it, he took a couple desultory late-career paydays before hanging up his gloves three years ago.
By getting Tyson to open up as he has, Toback has succeeded in illuminating one of the most polarizing, complex and -- the film almost forces one to admit -- misunderstood figures of our time. In the course of the film, Tyson moves from someone you might think you'd want to steer well clear of to a man you might actually want to meet and speak with, which is a significant accomplishment.
Lingering questions, however, hang over the "blackouts" Tyson increasingly claims he experienced at just the moments when he indulged in his most outrageous, inexplicable behavior. Are these genuine excuses for irresponsibility or possible evidence of brain damage? 
Shot on high-def, the film boasts a handsome, color-drenched look, and Larry McConsky's camera often gets in very tight on the subject just when it counts. Pic honors Tyson's stature as an exemplary student of boxing with a judicious selection of fight footage; key TV and docu footage, ranging from his bizarre sit-down with Givens for a Barbara Walters interview to his grotesque fulminations at a press conference, fills out the tightly edited feature.

The face of Mike Tyson  stares out from the screen like a sentry—intent, sober, watchful. The camera sits close, the framing is tight, and as we lock eyes with the former heavyweight champ who could shatter an opponent's confidence with little more than a glance, he seems to look past us into some unfathomable void. "The first question we ask is, 'Who am I?' " says the voice—unmistakable, unusually soft and high for a man—at the start of Tyson . It is a question Tyson asks of himself many more times over the following 90 minutes, although the closest thing to an answer comes relatively early, in an excerpt from an interview given by the boxer when he was still a teenage phenom on the rise: "Nobody really knows Mike Tyson." Nobody, including Mike Tyson himself.
Directed by James Toback , who previously cast Tyson in his dramatic features Black and White  and When Will I Be Loved , Tyson  isn't a traditional documentary portrait so much as a feature-length interview, in which the retired boxer, save for a sprinkling of archival footage and a montage of his famous fights, remains front and center for the entire running time. The only talking head is his own, albeit one that speaks in multiple, sometimes self-contradictory voices. In recent nonfiction cinema, the film's closest precedents are the Austrian-made Blind Spot: Hitler 's Secretary  and Errol Morris 's Robert McNamara  tête-à-tête, The Fog of War . But whereas the former film had the feeling of a confession and the latter of an interrogation, Tyson  is more like a particularly riveting therapy session, with Tyson as both analyst and patient.
The movie covers a lot of ground, some of it familiar—Tyson's early years as a bullied, fatherless youth on the tough streets of Brownsville, Brooklyn ; the petty criminality that landed him in an upstate New York juvenile facility; the redemption that he found in the person of septuagenarian boxing trainer Cus D'Amato —but much of it not. Even boxing fans who feel they know everything there is to know about Tyson may be surprised by the bracing candor with which he dissects his desire to fight ("I was afraid of being that way again . . . of being physically humiliated in the street again"), his 1992 rape conviction on charges brought by Miss Black America  contestant Desiree Washington  ("that wretched swine of a woman"), and the 1997 Evander Holyfield  bout that ended with part of Holyfield's ear on the canvas ("I was totally insane at that moment"). Often, Tyson is most revealing when he doesn't intend to be, as when he refers to the $14 million settlement he received from his 2004 lawsuit against Don King  as "a small amount of money." Likewise, Toback's film is as absorbing for what it addresses directly as for its underlying and irresolvable questions of race, sexuality, and violence in American society.
In 1989's The Big Bang , his sole previous nonfiction film, Toback was frequently on camera asking his subjects about the origins of the universe and the nature of existence. In Tyson —a movie about a cosmos of one—Toback smartly gets out of the way of his powerhouse subject in a manner that many a more seasoned documentarian would have been too predetermined to do. Probably, Tyson did not require much prompting—he has the air of a man eager to unburden himself. What he did need—what Tyson  would have been unthinkable without—was someone he could talk to; a fellow traveler on the path of obsession and desire who could wear down the calluses Tyson has built up over decades spent as a mass-media punching bag; someone willing to take Mike Tyson explicitly on his own terms.
Those terms are constantly in flux, for Tyson is nothing if not a Heisenbergian particle, like all the surrogate Bob Dylans  of I'm Not There  rolled into one—and Toback is much too smart to pretend to give us "the Mike Tyson we never knew" or any similarly reductive postulation. Toback doesn't come to lionize or to demonize, to goad his subject into a tearful breakdown (though Tyson does cry) or climactic Frost/Nixon  apologia, or even to suggest that Tyson has anything to apologize for in the first place. Instead, he gives us Iron Mike in all his monolithic multitudes and allows us, for a brief moment, to peer alongside him into the existential abyss.
No cosmic questions weigh upon Fighting , the second film by director Dito Montiel , whose 2006 debut, A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints , was the sort of crude but fascinating object you might find in an exhibition of naïf art. Adapted by Montiel—a former hardcore punk musician—from his autobiographical novel about his teenage delinquency on the streets of Astoria, that movie was a ragged, misshapen mess, but its guttural power was undeniable. It was as if the movie had been kicking around violently in Montiel's head for decades. Fighting  feels like it's been kicking around somewhere for a while, too—in the office of a studio development executive eager to find more Fast and the Furious –style catnip for the urban adrenaline-junkie crowd.
