
Einar Gilkyson. There's a name. Though not one that comes to mind when thinking about Robert Redford. Einar is a name for Max Von Sydow or Stellan Skarsgard. There are tougher hurdles for an actor, but this one gives you some idea of what Redford is up against in "An Unfinished Life": How do you play an Einar? Redford's solution appears to be: a little like Clint Eastwood. Oh, if only.
Einar runs a ranch in Wyoming. He wears cowboy hats and speaks his one-liners real slow with his jaw clenched. He's a loner and recovering alcoholic whose exasperated wife ran off with another man. He's the kind of guy who roughs up the punk cowboys that harass the waitress at the local diner then gives them a little speech. Einar's gruff exterior gets a break when he nurses his ailing buddy Mitch (Morgan Freeman, who else?) or sits and rambles aloud at the grave site of his son, who's been gone more than a decade.
At 68, Redford doesn't hold the screen with Eastwood's authority or charm, even though this character bears more than a vague resemblance to Eastwood's recent roles. Freeman's participation (he's just fine, doing his trademark wise-wiseacre sidekick bit), only underscores the spirit missing in Redford. The old soul we expect Freeman to bring out of such a misanthrope never really emerges.
But the movie, directed by Lasse Hallström, lacks spirit, too. The locations are lovely to behold. Parts of Canada give fine performances as Wyoming, so the film is scenic, like a postcard and just as perfunctory. Mark Spragg and Virginia Korus Spragg's screenplay does try for familial intrigue, but it's all been better somewhere else.
Einar gets an unwelcome visit from his estranged daughter-in-law Jean (Jennifer Lopez) and the little girl she had with his son. He hasn't seen Jean in 11 years, and he's never met Griff (Becca Gardner), who is named after her late daddy. Jean is running from an abusive boyfriend (Damian Lewis), and Einar, somewhat irrationally, blames her for his boy's death. (She was at the wheel the night he died in a crash.)
Reluctantly, Einar puts the two up. Eventually, he bonds with the grandkid. And inevitably, the violent boyfriend appears. But Jean has smartly struck up a sexual relationship with the local sheriff (Josh Lucas), and Einar owns a gun. There's also a grizzly on the loose, the very one that mauled Mitch. The film intends the bear to be some kind of metaphor for repression and later for freedom. But a moviegoer sees it howling and grunting and wonders how it's the only ferocious creature in the film.
"An Unfinished Life" has the ingredients for a revenge western, yet none of the teeth. We're asked to find entertaining a handful of guilty people who want to be redeemed. But neither Hallström nor much of the cast puts much grit or conviction behind the request.
Like most of Hallström's Hollywood movies ("The Cider House Rules," "Chocolat"), this one is excruciatingly tasteful. Lopez and Lucas's tryst, for instance, is set in a car and has been shot at a depressing remove. The characters can seem private to each other, but they shouldn't to us. No film containing domestic abuse, a deadly grizzly, fistfights, curse words, and this many hurt feelings should feel so polite.
The movie was scheduled to come out late last year, near the release of Eastwood's "Million Dollar Baby," but was held. The relationships and tone in "An Unfinished Life" are too much like that film, yet not nearly enough. "Quarter-million Dollar Baby" is more like it.
Why would Redford be interested in such a slow, laden picture? Probably the same reason anyone would be: The chance to rub Morgan Freeman's back. All the movie has going for it is Griff's suspicion that Einar and Mitch might be lovers. Good try, but she'll have to wait until Ang Lee's "Brokeback Mountain" for her dream of gay cowboys to come true. Still, the girl's suggestion is more convincing and more perceptive than anything else in the film.


         A bear runs through "An Unfinished Life," both literally and figuratively, a bear that symbolizes the ways this potentially involving film goes astray. And despite the presence of high-wattage talent like Robert Redford, Jennifer Lopez and Morgan Freeman, astray is where it definitely goes.
 
  To be fair, "An Unfinished Life," directed by Lasse Hallstrom, is not as damaged as might be imagined given the months it spent on the Miramax shelf in the wake of that company's reorganization. It's an acceptable film, but the story of family ties and forgiveness simply cannot manage the emotional connections it is desperate for.
 


         






    That, of course, is not the bear's fault. But if you've seen the documentary "Grizzly Man," the first thing you notice about this film's bear (played by the Doug Seus-trained Bart II, the successor to the legendary Bart) is how phenomenally sleek he is, groomed and blow-dried enough for a Ralph Lauren ad.
 
  The same can be said for "An Unfinished Life's" earnest narrative about troubled relationships, slicked-up and polished to within an inch of its life and not any more real than the bear. This is the kind of film that when someone asks, "Do you want to know the ugly little truth?" it takes an effort not to scream, "No, no, a thousand times no!"
 
  The other problem with the bear is that he is not just a random beast roaming rural Wyoming (actually British Columbia), he is on the prowl for awkwardly metaphoric purposes. And if the bear's presence is too pat and obvious, so is the screenplay by the husband-and-wife team of Mark Spragg and Virginia Korus Spragg.
 
  That script has an interesting history. It started out with discussions between the Spraggs. He, a novelist and screenwriter, turned the idea into a novel, while she, a former therapist, did the first draft of the script.
 
  The leanly written novel was widely praised for its unsentimental nature when it was published last year, but that quality is nowhere to be found in the film. Which is not surprising given that director Hallstrom, whose previous films include "The Shipping News," "Chocolat" and "The Cider House Rules," is a known wallower in emotion.
 
  The film's story is not a complicated one. It starts with cantankerous rancher Einar Gilkyson (Redford), living outside Ishawooa, Wyo., with former hired hand Mitch Bradley (Freeman), now disabled because of an attack by that wandering bear. Up on a hill above the ranch house is the grave of Einar's died-too-young son, with a gravestone inscribed "An Unfinished Life."
 
  Halfway across the country, Einar's widowed daughter-in-law, Jean (Lopez), and Griff, the 11-year-old granddaughter he doesn't know he has (a charming Becca Gardner) are having problems of their own. Ensnared in an abusive relationship with soft-spoken psycho Gary (Damian Lewis), Jean returns to Ishawooa for the first time in more than a decade. Einar, who holds Jean responsible for his son's death, does not exactly greet her with open arms, but local sheriff Crane Curtis (Josh Lucas) is more receptive.
 
  If you've ever seen a movie, you know what's going to happen. Griff and her grandfather will get close, psycho Gary will show up out of nowhere and that pesky bear will serve some dread metaphorical purpose. It's not that the action is that badly done, it's that it's so obvious.
 
  While Lopez, Freeman and Lucas do solid work, it is Redford who seems to be having the most fun playing the crankiest geezer in town. Still, if you compare his scenes with Freeman with what Freeman did with Clint Eastwood in a similar relationship in "Million Dollar Baby," you end up respecting what Eastwood and screenwriter Paul Haggis accomplished more.
 
  When the bear isn't on screen, "An Unfinished Life" makes do with sentimental musings like "Do you think the dead really care about our lives?" If that includes watching pictures like this, the answer is probably no.
 
 'An Unfinished Life'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for some violence, including domestic abuse, and language
 
 Times guidelines:
 Wife beating, sexual references and other adult material
 
 Released by Miramax Films. Director Lasse Hallstrom. Producers Leslie Holleran, Kelliann  Ladd, Alan Ladd, Jr. Screenplay Mark Spragg and Virginia Korus Spragg. Cinematographer Oliver Stapleton. Editor Andrew Mondshein. Costumes Tish Monaghan. Music Deborah Lurie. Production design David Gropman. Set decorator Lesley Beale. Running time: 1 hour, 40 minutes. In general release.   

It comes as no surprise that the merchandise Miramax is selling these days (in the dreg weeks of summertime moviegoing, as the company switches to new, Weinstein-less management) is slightly irregular. Not for nothing did The Great Raid , The Brothers Grimm , and Underclassman  earn their loserplex release slots. So the absence of a pulse in An Unfinished Life , while dismaying, is hardly shocking: Had there been stronger corporate belief in the viability of the catalog item, such a prestige production — starring Robert Redford, Morgan Freeman, and Jennifer Lopez, directed by Lasse Hallström, and based on a well-respected specimen of bear-wrestling, male-bonding, woman-bruising literature by Mark Spragg — might not have sat on the shelf so long.
Still, there's a certain valedictory frisson to seeing the movie now, a time-capsule rightness. An Unfinished Life  is inert, kaput — a middlebrow mush of platitudes rather than an okay corral of distinct characters with heartbeats. It's awful not in an exciting, uncontrolled way but in an overly controlled, narcotized way, an imitation of too many inspirational heal-the-pain dramas that Miramax has released since the dawn of their Oscar age. But by those very failings, the work is, oddly, a moving epitaph for just the kind of cinema with which the influential company stormed Hollywood in the first place. And it's fitting that this faux celebration of human resiliency is directed by Hallström, who helped perfect the formula with The Cider House Rules  and Chocolat .
Spragg's novel perches somewhere between a John Irving fantasia and a Jim Harrison tussle in which guilty men come to terms with their angry inner animal and women pick themselves off the ground where they've been knocked by some lout. Hallström's kinder, gloppier interpretation favors more golden Hollywood key-lighting to tell the story of Einar Gilkyson (a stubbled Redford, muttering to himself), an ornery coot intractably bitter over the death of his son; his maimed hired hand and best friend, Mitch (Freeman); and Jean (Lopez), his widowed daughter-in-law with lousy taste in boyfriends, who shows up at Einar's remote Wyoming ranch seeking refuge, black-and-blue but nevertheless well coiffed. (She looks ready to cut a pop album if cajoled.) So that the young can teach the old, Jean totes a granddaughter (newcomer Becca Gardner) Einar never knew he had, one of those brave Pippi Longstocking types so in vogue. There's tension between Einar and Jean, tension between Jean and her abusive ex (a thanklessly focused Damian Lewis), bonding between the granddaughter and Einar, and marital-style bickering between Einar and Mitch. There's also a supposedly fearsome bear — I think he represents the roar in every man — who, through no fault of his own, suffers greatly in comparison with the magnetism of the killers in Werner Herzog's Grizzly Man .
The novel moves forward with a certain dagnabbed masculinity of literary style. The movie (with a screenplay by the author and his wife, Virginia Korus Spragg) puddles with indulgence, a big dollop of it served up by the stars themselves, each of whom is playing Redford Man (taciturn horse whisperer), Freeman Man (saintly friend of a white guy), or Lopez Woman (roughed-up enough for Enough, but with perfect make-up ''bruises'') one time too many.
As an era ends, are we finished with synthetic literary concoctions like An Unfinished Life ? I hope so. A river runs through it, all right, but don't ask ''A river of what?'' because it's not polite to say.


A film is in trouble when, despite the presence of an A-list cast and a well-regarded director, the best thing in it is a bear. After two years on the shelf, Lasse Hallstrom's "An Unfinished Life" emerges as a cliched meller about the tense reunion between a Wyoming rancher (Robert Redford) and his long-lost kin. Most of the film's above-the-liners seem to be retracing old steps, creating a somnambulant atmosphere. Part of Miramax's celluloid mountain of unreleased fodder due to bow this autumn, pic can only hope to appeal to a blockbuster-weary older demographic and escape critical mauling.
In Ishawooa, Wyo., former alcoholic farmer Einar Gilkyson (Redford) takes care of his few remaining animals and his best friend Mitch (Morgan Freeman), a former ranch hand who suffered terrible injuries after being attacked by a bear. The two get by on stoicism for Einar, morphine for Mitch and mutually sustaining old men's banter.
The spread's delicate emotional ecosystem is suddenly upset by the arrival of Jean Gilkyson (Jennifer Lopez), Einar's errant daughter-in-law, who ran off pregnant 12-odd years ago after Einar's son Griffin, the "unfinished life" of the title, was killed in a car crash. Jean had been driving, and Einar never forgave her.
Since then, Jean has been dragging her 11-year-old daughter Griff (newcomer Becca Gardner) around the country. Her latest boyfriend, Gary (Freeman's "Dreamcatcher" co-star Damian Lewis), hit her one too many times, hence her trek to the old homestead.
The drawn-out middle act observes this newly formed family as they tentatively establish bonds, particularly between young Griff, her gruff granddad and his friend whom, in the pic's funniest scene, she assumes is his gay lover. Jean gets a job as a waitress in the town's only restaurant working alongside good broad Nina (Camryn Manheim), and starts knocking boots with local sheriff Crane (Josh Lucas) after warning him to look out for her ex, Gary.
Sure enough, two ferocious creatures resurface. The bear that mauled Mitch is captured and stuck in a makeshift zoo. Meanwhile, Gary starts skulking round the ranch's edge, smoking cigarettes to signal his irredeemable nature. When Einar escorts Gary out of town at gunpoint, Gary sneers, "You've seen too many Westerns, old man," to which Einar retorts, "That doesn't exactly work in your favor."
But then again, Gary has a point. Viewers will have seen too much of all this for it to feel fresh; too many better modern Westerns lauding down-home values; too many pics where a liberated animal is the symbol of redemption; too many Lasse Hallstrom middle-brow tales about misshapen or outcast folk who form makeshift families ("The Cider House Rules," "The Shipping News," "What's Eating Gilbert Grape"); and one too many stories where Redford co-stars with a bear ("Jeremiah Johnson") and J-Lo struggles to regain audience sympathy by playing a victim of abuse ("Enough") with perfectly coiffed hair and a decorative bruise that color-coordinates with her wardrobe.
Thesping is not up to the usual Hallstrom standard. Redford, who seems to be putting his own laconic spin on a part that feels like it was written for Clint Eastwood, doesn't muster anything much more than dignity and manly grumpiness, but at least he can really throw a lasso.
Meanwhile, Freeman is, as he was in "Million Dollar Baby," the pic's tragedy-worn Jiminy Cricket, looking noble in adversity and uttering wise advice from his sickbed. Young Gardner has a tough tenderness, and she brings out the best in her older male co-stars.
Lopez's perf, however, is strictly one-note. Editing seems designed to disguise her weaknesses by reducing her role to a number of backlit closeups that let her look pretty. In what should be her biggest scene -- a fight with Einar about her husband's death -- the camera offers mostly closeups of Redford reacting as she shouts at him from offscreen.
All in all, ursine thesp Bart the bear offers the most memorable turn of the lot.
Mark Spragg's tidy adaptation of his novel, collaborating with Virginia Korus Spragg, pushes didactic forgiveness and family-values themes for all they're worth in the last act, which may get soft-hearted viewers sobbing. Still, Hallstrom dawdles over tying up loose ends and the pacing feels maple-syrup slow.
Best element out of the generally pro but decidedly average tech package is the typically rich, honey-hued lensing by regular Hallstrom collaborator Oliver Stapleton. Use of widescreen does ample justice to breathtaking British Columbia locations. Score by Christopher Young is mawkish.

Lasse Hallstrom  never met a case of advanced emotional constipation he couldn't unplug in two psychobabbly hours or less, and his latest seriocomic slice of wry, An Unfinished Life , marches its characters toward expulsive redemption with a predictability that's almost impressive. Suffice it to say that little goes unfinished here, much less unsaid or unacknowledged.
The issue at hand is what's eating Einar Gilkyson  (Robert Redford ), a Wyoming  rancher who's become cynical and withdrawn since the death of his grown son in a car accident. His estranged daughter-in-law, Jean (Jennifer Lopez ), is evading a demon of her own (Damian Lewis  as a deus ex-girlfriend-beater) and flees to Einar's ranch with her pre-adolescent daughter (Becca Gardner)—the granddaughter Einar didn't know he had—in tow. Sparks fly because the elder Gilkyson blames Jean for his boy's demise (she was at the wheel of the death car), but he's equally burdened by guilt over the earlier bear-mauling of his live-in friend and ranch hand Mitch (Morgan Freeman ). A hunky town cop (Josh Lucas ) and said grizzly hang around to provide local color.
There's an appealing literary quality to all of Unfinished 's key tragedies having occurred prior to the start of the movie, and its bleak north-country setting serves the story well (although the British Columbia –as-Wyoming locations are rather statically shot by DP Oliver Stapleton). The mournful, shell-shocked tone these elements supply, however, is fully squandered by too tidy plotting and a lugubriously foregone resolution; unassuaged filial grief may be anathema to Hollywood , but a film like Phil Morrison 's sly, devastating Junebug  reveals how much more of a wallop it packs than the Hallmark Channel  palliatives at play here.
Hallstrom's light touch somewhat mitigates the stultifying sentimentality, as do the occasional zingers in Mark Spragg  and Virginia Korus Spragg 's screenplay (the subject of Einar and Mitch's apparent couplehood is even wittily broached). But as with the director's other films, all that keeps Unfinished  from being a complete, treacly bore is its robust performances. Redford seems more energized than he's been in a while, and though it's a leap to imagine the Sultan of Sundance as any town's coot, he obviously relishes the opportunity to play more or less against type. For her part, J.Lo manages to remain generally unobtrusive, and Camryn Manheim  nicely underplays a small role as Jean's waitressing buddy.
And then there's Morgan Freeman, who's left to play yet another wise black mascot who totes the bulk of the film's metaphorical baggage and ushers yet another stubborn white wretch into self-actualization. Mitch gets little in return for his trouble besides three hots, a cot, and a daily painkiller shot, and most of his screen time is spent in bed; hell, even the bear has better scenes. The reasons for Freeman's woeful typecasting are many and depressing, I'm sure, but really—would it have been so inconceivable to cast him as this movie's lead?
