
Why is it in horror movies that bad things always happen to the same girl? That girl, who's somewhere between "Juno" and "One Tree Hill," has two emotional gears (scared, not scared) but looks pretty good in layered camisoles and often sees the dead.
I had plenty of time to think about this during "The Uninvited," a brutally inane movie that opens today. Its protagonist Anna (Emily Browning) has just been sprung from a mental institution and is picked up by her author father (David Strathairn, making a mortgage payment). He drives her to their waterfront manse in Maine, where she reunites with Alex (Arielle Kebbel), her sarcastic, inebriated older sister. (This sounds loosely like the beginning of "Rachel Getting Married," but never mind).
Anna lost it after an only-in the-movies house fire killed her mother. Rehabbed, she begins to suspect that her late mother's former nurse, who has become her father's girlfriend, might have set the fire. (Elizabeth Banks plays her with entertaining obviousness.) How does Anna know? The nubile nurse's alleged victims return from the grave to tell her so.
Unofficially, "The Uninvited" is a remake of the passably spooky Korean gothic, "A Tale of Two Sisters." But the name of the original movie's maker, Kim Ji-Woon, never appears in the credits or press notes, where names like Hitchcock, Polanski, and De Palma are delusionally dropped. The film's producers also made "The Ring" and "Disturbia," and it looks like they just decided to hire hacks to make a lucrative new sandwich of their old hits.
Kim's 2003 film is mentioned only as "underlying material." Hopefully, he's been compensated. This Hollywood version required three credited screenwriters and two directors (they call themselves the Guard Brothers), and I defy any of them to explain the movie they've made. I also defy them to explain Anna's father's latest novel. "The Repose of Sand." Really?
"The Uninvited" is a mess of styles and stolen ideas, including a plot twist that would make M. Night Shyamalan roll his eyes and dialogue straight from a CW scene generator. This hardly scared the horror partisans the night I saw the film. For almost 90 minutes they cracked up and sassed the screen. Were we at a scary movie or "Paul Blart"?
No one involved with "The Uninvited" has talent for building suspense. So it's up to ghoulish children, say, to pop from under the stove and jolt us. This kid warns Anna about her wicked - and wicked hot - stepmother-to-be ("You're next!"). I'm sorry, but have you ever looked under the average kitchen stove? What's actually under there is a lot more frightening.


In The Uninvited  an unstable teen (Emily Browning) suspects her mom was killed by her dad's hot new fiancée (Elizabeth Banks , with cleavage far perkier than her TV-movie line readings). Horror standbys like mangled corpses and stone-faced children pop up regularly, but sibling directors Charles and Thomas Guard haven't quite nailed the genre's rhythms: Their frights tend to loiter onscreen just long enough for us to see that they aren't all that scary in the first place.
More from EW:  Box Office Preview: Taken  vs. the Super Bowl

 “The Uninvited” sounds like the name of a generic horror movie, which is more or less what it is. But when you stop to think about it, the title is actually a clue to the picture’s lameness. Words beginning with “un” do have a certain scary resonance — intimations of the unknown, the undead, the uncontrollable and the unholy — but “uninvited”? As in “not on the guest list”? Only in Hollywood could such a notion be a source of terror.  By the time the credits rolled (“directed by the  Guard Brothers”), I wished that the title had referred to me. But invited I was, along with a few hundred other restless souls, for whose company on a wintry Tuesday night I was profoundly grateful.  Two gentlemen behind me kept up a lively, derisive banter — the kind of thing that would ordinarily drive me mad with rage but that in this case saved me a bit of work. Just at the moment when the kindly local sheriff left the heroine alone in a dark room, assuring her that no one else would get hurt — spoiler alert! he was wrong! — one fellow asked his friend: “Is this a commercial break? Because I need to go to the bathroom.”  “And,” his companion said, “I need to see a commercial for a better movie.”  Come to think of it, nearly any random minute of “The Uninvited” (and there are only 87 of them) could serve as just such an advertisement. The movie doesn’t look bad. It includes some picturesque shots of a handsomely rugged coastline and elegant camerawork that would be more effective if the Guards did not shamelessly telegraph every jolt and scare with obvious close-ups, low-angle shots and premature sound cues. Don’t open that garbage can! Don’t look under that stove! Don’t fall in that grave!  The cast includes a worried-looking David Strathairn, and also Elizabeth Banks, gamely exploring the evil-stepmom potential latent in her fresh-faced charm. Emily Browning and Arielle Kebbel play two sisters, one spooky (that’s Anna, played by Ms. Browning), one wild (Alex, Ms. Kebbel), who fret and bicker and shriek and occasionally walk around in bathing suits.  The main problem with “The Uninvited” lies in its refusal to decide just what movie it wants to be a commercial for. It certainly doesn’t have much in common with “A Tale of Two Sisters,” the creepy Korean horror film of which it is supposedly a remake.  Instead it rummages around in familiar domestic genres looking for a reason to exist. Is it a melancholy, I-see-dead-people ghost story? The tale of a teenage girl whose quasi-supernatural gifts are obvious metaphors for sexual anxiety? A serial-killer-in-the-house thriller in the tradition of “The Hand That Rocks the Cradle”?  Yes, all of those, though to specify in what order might give away the ridiculous climactic plot twist. And if I did that, I might never get another invitation.  “The Uninvited” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some killing. Some swearing.

Weak even by the standard of uninspired recent Asian-horror remakes, "The Uninvited" is more likely to induce snickers and yawns than shudders and yelps. Inauspicious feature debut for co-helmers Charles and Thomas Guard -- billed as "the Guard Brothers," though the brothers Coen, Wachowski and Polish needn't lose any sleep over the new sibs in town -- is a flat, obvious effort that doesn't begin to approach the creepiness of the 2003 South Korean original "A Tale of Two Sisters." Genre's current robust health will make this a decent but fast-fading B.O. starter, with easy ancillary profits following.
Institutionalized after a suicide attempt in the wake of her already ill mother's death in an accidental fire, teen Anna (Emily Browning) is released to re-join author dad Steven (David Strathairn) and bad-girl sis Alex (Arielle Kebbel) at their rather lavish, gated oceanside manse. There's a less welcome "family" member present, too, at least as far as the daughters are concerned: Rachel (Elizabeth Banks), mom's erstwhile private nurse, now middle-age-crazy Steven's sexy live-in girlfriend.
Both sisters are already discomfited enough by this smiling usurper when Anna starts experiencing warning visions -- including one in which their dead ma none too subtly points at Rachel and exhales, "Murderer!" A little Internet research suggests Rachel isn't who she claims to be. Then Anna's ex-boyfriend (Jesse Moss), who saw what really happened the night mom died, turns up dead before he can share that knowledge.
There's a major twist in the last reel. But while it might have had rug-pulling impact on viewers in a better movie, the pic's lack of any preceding credibility or nuance renders said development as ineffectual as everything else.
Almost half an hour shorter and a whole lot blunter than Kim Jee-woon's original, "The Uninvited" -- a title with no particular relevance -- is clumsily written (by Craig Rosenberg, Doug Miro and Carlo Bernard) and even more gracelessly directed. A hopefully well-paid Strathairn is wasted. Banks, having proven onscreen versatility in multiple pics over the past year, suggests here she'd make a fine "Fatal Attraction"-style villainess in a less moronic vehicle. Younger leads don't flatter themselves, but then, the brothers Guard don't do much to help them out.
Feature is rotely polished but lacks any sense of style or atmosphere, attractive British Columbia locations aside. Tech/design contributions are generic.
