
The marketers of ''Venom" would like to remind you that this horror movie is directed by Jim Gillespie (''I Know What You Did Last Summer") and produced by Kevin Williamson (writer of that Gillespie effort and ''Scream"). They hope this will distract you from the stupidity of the film's crowbar-wielding swamp-monster plot.
''Venom," written by Brandon Boyce (''Apt Pupil," ''Wicker Park") and video game creators Flint Dille and John Zuur Platten, is so far beneath comparisons to ''Scream" and ''I Know What You Did" that it would have to add a Jennifer Love Hewitt cameo just to keep company with the worst sequels of those popular movies.
If you must know the premise: A voodoo priestess who's been (don't laugh) ''milking" very bad men of their most atrocious evils accidentally releases those spirits in a car wreck, along with a battered suitcase full of snakes. The murderous vipers then slither into the corpse of a greasy tow-truck driver, turning him into a zombie maniac stalking the Louisiana bayou, apparently on a mission to make its denizens fear the sound of jangling keys.
Agnes Bruckner (''Blue Car") plays Eden, the good girl with plans to attend college in New York, and Jonathan Jackson (TV's ''General Hospital") is Eric, the puppy-faced ex-boyfriend who's miffed that she's moving on. After the possessed truck driver (Rick Cramer) brutally eliminates a few bumbling authority figures and highly dispensable pretty young things, he picks a fight with Eden and Eric, who are by this point holed up in a remote safe house along with the voodoo priestess's granddaughter (Meagan Good) and a couple more friends who can still look attractive while being dismembered or impaled.
Method Man plays a deputy, which couldn't matter less.
If ridiculous, hackneyed, gratuitously violent slasher movies aren't your thing, don't go near ''Venom" with a 10-foot snake pole. And if they are your thing, note that this is loaded with lazy contrivances and dead ends that should annoy any horror fan who's been paying attention for one or more of the last several decades.
The creepiest thing here is the moist Louisiana landscape, which even in sunshine is naturally more ominous than anything manufactured by special effects or script. It therefore seems particularly unfortunate that ''Venom" comes out immediately in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, when real-life horrors are so plentiful in the region. But hey, why pause for questions of taste?
Those who come looking for humor may find some in the dialogue and editing; just take into consideration that, unlike ''Scream" and ''I Know What You Did," ''Venom" is the kind of movie you laugh at
 instead of with
. For starters, those filmmaking credentials are a pretty good joke.


         As if Louisiana has not been through enough, according to "Venom" all the evil spirits captured by an elderly rural voodoo woman have inadvertently been unleashed. Assuming the form of snakes, they attack a mechanic (Rick Cramer), setting him off on a lethal rampage. Smartly directed by Jim Gillespie from a script by various hands, "Venom" is from Dimension Films and follows its stylish, energetic and darkly amusing horror movie tradition. As usual for Dimension, the film — shot largely on atmospheric locations in Louisiana — focuses on a group of teens, especially a resilient young woman (Agnes Bruckner) who's just landed a pre-med scholarship to Columbia University and is not about to let some tire-iron-wielding bayou monster spoil her plans without a fight.
 
 --Kevin Thomas
 
   "Venom,"
 R for strong horror violence/gore and language. Running time: 1 hour, 28 minutes. In general release.


Now may not be the best time to release a popcorn pic about people dying in Louisiana, but as mindless scare machines go, Dimension Films' bayou-set slasher thriller acquits itself well enough. Gratuitously gory and derivative to the core, "Venom" manages to deliver some effective frights in between large swaths of voodoo gibberish, but the atrociously ill timing all but guarantees a poisonous reception.
In a Louisiana marsh, gas station owner Ray (Rick Cramer) attempts to save an old Creole woman from a car crash, unaware that she's traveling with a suitcase full of venomous serpents containing all the demons she has exorcised from murderers in the past. After dying a ridiculously protracted death by drowning and snakebite, Ray is resurrected as a killer who, like Jason and Freddy before him, exists mainly to impale any teenagers stupid enough to cross his path.
He has plenty to choose from, including a blonde who tries to rob his gas station (Bijou Phillips, putting her high-pitched squeak to good use), his own illegit son Sean (D.J. Cotrona) and various black and gay characters who are dispatched almost as quickly as they are introduced. On the smarter end are Eden (the uncannily self-possessed Agnes Bruckner) and Cece (Meagan Good), who alone knows how to fight the killer supernaturally.
Hoary as the mystical elements are, scribes Flint Dille, John Zuur Platten and Brandon Boyce show a crazy conviction -- one might even call it integrity -- in their plundering of the supernatural, culminating in an elaborate voodoo ritual involving blood, candles and a fresh corpse that is educational, to say the least.
Execution also benefits from the imprimatur of savvy "Scream" maven Kevin Williamson (here in a producing role) and relatively restrained direction by Jim Gillespie (who helmed the Williamson-scripted "I Know What You Did Last Summer"). Rather than bury the story in shock cuts, Gillespie and editor Paul Martin Smith ratchet up the tension slowly by letting scenes simply play themselves out.
Ably capturing the region's muddy earth tones and warm, candle-lit interiors, cinematographer Steve Mason also shows a knack for deploying offscreen space to spring some impressively nasty shocks. Gore level is very high and very red.
