         Actor Richard E. Grant makes his feature writing-directing debut with the semiautobiographical drama "Wah-Wah," which is both acidly funny and very moving. Described as a "coming of age at the end of an age" story, the film is set in late-1960s Swaziland on the verge of its independence.
 
 The memories are more bitter than sweet for Grant, best known for roles in films such as "Withnail & I," "The Age of Innocence" and "Gosford Park," as he recalls the domestic turmoil growing up in the Southeast African British protectorate. Things almost immediately begin to go badly for his fictional proxy, Ralph Compton (Zachary Fox), son of the minister of education, when he inadvertently witnesses his mother, Lauren (Miranda Richardson), committing adultery in the front seat of a car.
 


         






   Twelve-year-old Ralph is further traumatized and left alone with his father, Harry (Gabriel Byrne), when his mother leaves with her paramour, another member of the hypocritically judgmental British colony. Unable to cope with the loss of his wife, Harry packs Ralph off to boarding school and takes solace in alcohol.
 
 Two years later, Ralph has sprouted into a lanky teen, now played by Nicholas Hoult, who taught Hugh Grant a thing or two in "About a Boy." When Ralph returns home from school on a break, he discovers Harry has impetuously married again, to a loud American former air hostess named Ruby, played by the beguiling Emily Watson.
 
 Ralph tries hard not to like Ruby but finds that she understands him far better than either of his parents, and they become necessary allies when Harry's drinking turns him into a Jekyll and Hyde personality. By day, he is the charming backslapping politico, but at night, when the liquor cabinet opens, he's a vicious drunk.
 
 Ruby provides Grant the most ammunition with which to skewer the colonials. As an outsider, she brings a fresh perspective and leaps at every chance to point out their contradictions. It's Ruby who mocks the upper-class slang that's spoken, the "toodle-pips" and "hobbly-jobblys" that sound like so much "Wah-Wah" to her.
 
 Against a certain nostalgia for a period when the sun was definitely setting on the empire, Grant balances a sharp satire of the "hoity-toity" Brits with a tender memoir of the dissolution of his family. His depiction of the cloistered social scene where adultery is rampant but a divorcée is shunned is tremendously engaging. In his writing, Grant makes use of the same keen sense of observation that made his published film diaries, "With Nails," and novel, "By Design," so amusing.
 
 He also shows that his time on the sets of directors Bruce Robinson, Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese, and others, was well spent. The film is crisply directed and well-paced, making good use of African panoramas to give the hothouse drawing room scenes space to breathe. And like many actors who turn to directing, Grant has assembled an excellent cast, which includes Julie Walters and Celia Imrie.
 
 A wry and involving film, "Wah-Wah" is clearly a labor of love for both Grant and his cast. Grant opens up his life, not with embarrassment or explanation but with humanity and gratitude. Emotional, melodramatic and sentimental, the film unabashedly wears its heart on its sleeve, and is the better for it.
 
 *
 
 'Wah-Wah'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for some language and brief sexuality
 
 A Roadside Attractions and Samuel Goldwyn Films presentation. Writer-director Richard E. Grant. Producers Marie-Castille Mention-Schaar. Pierre Kubel and Jeff Abberley. Director of photography Pierre Aïm. Editor Isabelle Dedieu. Costume designer Sheena Napier. Music Patrick Doyle. Production designer Gary Williamson. Running time: 1 hour, 37 minutes.
 
 At selected theaters.   

Pace the personal dramas in Wah-Wah  out over the course of five years and you've got the makings of a cracking British TV soap, one of those awfully atmospheric things set in colonial Africa involving booze, adultery, and racial and class conflict. Cram it into one semiautobiographical filmmaking debut for actor Richard E. Grant (Withnail & I ) and you've got an overdeveloped coming-of-age potboiler set on the eve of Swaziland's independence. About a Boy 's Nicholas Hoult plays Grant's stand-in, Ralph, coping with a mother (Miranda Richardson) who runs off with another man; an alcoholic father (Gabriel Byrne); and an outspoken American  stepmother (Emily Watson), who identifies foppish British slang as so much ''wah-wah.''

 Set to the death rattle of the British Empire in Africa, "Wah-Wah" observes the disintegration of the Compton family through the eyes of its young son, Ralph (Zachary Fox and, later, Nicholas Hoult). When Harry Compton (Gabriel Byrne) learns that his high-strung wife, Lauren (Miranda Richardson), has run off with his best friend, he dives into a bottle, emerging just long enough to marry a free-spirited American stewardess named Ruby (Emily Watson).  While Ruby and Lauren come and go in Harry's increasingly dysfunctional life, Ralph eases the emotional strain with a part in the amateur production of "Camelot" that the colonials are staging in honor of an impending visit from Princess Margaret. Independence looms for their  country,  Swaziland, but "Wah-Wah" — Ruby's phrase for the expats' silly slang — pushes race to the fringes and nonwhites into supporting domestic roles. In this movie  the political is never permitted to intrude upon the personal.  In his writing and directing debut, the actor Richard E. Grant examines the pungent details of his own childhood in Swaziland, vividly recreating a community steeped in boredom, booze and casual adultery. Yet for all its studied snobbery and brittle entitlement, the film is never mean-spirited: even Ralph's monstrous parents are treated with more compassion than they deserve. Clearly, Mr. Grant's memories are more fond than bitter — even if the same probably can't be said of the Swazis.  "Wah-Wah" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Mildly offensive language, inoffensive sex and cringe-worthy British behavior.
A well-scrubbed 11-year-old is jolted awake in the backseat of his dad's Mercedes to discover Mom (Miranda Richardson ) gripping the dashboard, breathing hard, boinking another guy. It's the summer of '69 in Swaziland , and English colonialism is going out with a bang. Dad (Gabriel Byrne ), the country's alcoholic minister of education, bullies his adulterous wife into flying the coop, ships the kid off to boarding school, and marries Ruby (Emily Watson ), a loopy ex-stewardess whose disdain for the snooty upper crust eventually earns the favor of her rebellious stepson. That the film is semi- autobiographical for caustic actor-turned-writer-director Richard E. Grant  helps explain its severely, sometimes laughably bitter tone. By the time Grant's twitchy alter ego (Nicholas Hoult ) returns home as a teen and joins the adult bourgeois in staging an amateur production of Camelot (!), the insularity appears pointedly absurd. Grant is no Douglas Sirk , but his imitation of life makes plain that the darker tale of budding independence still hasn't caught the gentry's eye.
