
``Waist Deep" is the story of a neighborhood under siege. South Los Angeles is still caught in gangbangers' crossfire, and the movie pretends to be mad as hell about it.
Our kids are dying on these streets. For nothin'. The civil rights movement may be in the past, but Martin Luther King wouldn't stand for the violence and the ignorance that holds us back.
We need to take these streets back! Back from the pushers! Back from the thugs! Back from the hoochie-mamas and baby-daddys! Back from the thugs who push hoochie-mamas on baby-daddys!
Can I get an A-- Oh, wait a minute. Excuse me, miss. Who you? You out here in this war zone in that tight, short skirt and skimpy top all by yourself? Where your man at? Huh? Oh, the streets? I'll save them later. Right now I'm talking to you, loveliness.
Yes, ``Waist Deep" is the story of a neighborhood under siege. The movie preaches about cleaning out the criminal element. But all too tellingly, it has one eye on blight and the other on the contents of Meagan Good's shirt. Good plays a hooker who helps an ex-con (Tyrese Gibson) raise the hundred grand to get his son back from the crack kingpin (the rapper The Game) who carjacked him while the kid was in the back seat. Their primary mode of fund-raising is bank robbery. She runs sexy, keyed-up interference while he empties safe-deposit boxes and strolls out. The movie boasts that it's ``Bonnie and Clyde on the flip side."
But only momentarily, if at all. It's more a remake of Jay-Z and Beyonce's 2003 classic single than of Arthur Penn's classic movie. Still had ``Waist Deep" been 101 minutes of holdups, it could have been something. Instead, the movie is full of plodding chases and bad acting from the supporting cast. The tyke playing Gibson's son is Tickle Me Elmo with cornrows. Larenz Tate as Gibson's flunky cousin turns in the same slacker-gangsta performance he's been giving since he renounced movie romance for the gym. (Even he seems to know he just doesn't make any sense without Nia Long.) And The Game, playing a shirtless sadist, can extend his feud with 50 Cent by bragging that somehow he has the less charismatic screen presence.
Savory touches abound, though. Kimora Lee Simmons plays a ghetto-fabulous version of herself (if such a thing isn't too terribly redundant). And once, Good rings a doorbell and intones a password that goes something like, ``Prada jeans, Gucci
 pumps, Fendi bodybag." Outside somebody else's house, she says this: ``It's Double Dutch, Mookie cousin." Both times, she makes you want to find an ice cream truck or stand in front of a gushing fire hydrant. (It'd be nice to see her play a schoolteacher or a law student, but the movies don't seem to think she's made for study breaks. She's built like a brick house and, for the movies, that's that.)
In any case, ``Waist Deep" is a cynical excuse for the writer and director (and talented actor) Vondie Curtis-Hall to sock some money away for the kids' college tuition. It's as if he watched ``Get Rich or Die Tryin' " and thought, ``It needs more palm trees." It's also as if the only way he could justify making another movie smitten with thug life is by having the characters commit their crimes amid a climate of civic activism.
Courtesy of the radio frequently playing in the movie's background, we hear all about rallies and protests to save South Los Angeles, yet we barely see them or the wordy intellectual Michael Eric Dyson , whose voice shows up on some station. (Were the car chases and shootouts cheaper to film?) There's also a rumor on the radio that Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa might show up. Why should he though? He's probably already seen this movie.


         For roughly its first half hour, "Waist Deep" looks as if it's going to amount to something solid among so-called "urban thrillers." Much like its hero, an ex-con-turned-single dad-security-guard named O-2 (Tyrese Gibson), the movie shows an unsteady, yet earnest resolve to fulfill modest expectations. And then, everything flies off the rails.
 
  Hope for the movie holds out just a little bit longer than for O-2 — or "O" for short. He's so into being the dutiful dad rushing to pick up his son (H. Hunter Hall) from school that he forgets to leave behind his sidearm at work. How it happens that a recently paroled man is entrusted by any institution to carry a gun is the first of many absurdities that aren't easily explained away.
 


         






    Junior (the son's name) is napping in O-2's back seat when hoodlums seize both convertible and child. O takes down some of the thugs in a firefight, but the car is gone. The only lead O can grab comes from a comely hustler (Meagan Good), who becomes his reluctant partner. It turns out that Junior is being held for ransom by the Dirty Rat Who Sent Our Hero Up the River. Given the prosaic name of Meat (rap star the Game), the monster-mobster's venality is established by his willingness to sever limbs of those who make him mad.
 
  As its plot thickens, "Waist Deep" gets more outlandish. The whole mess empties out into an overextended car chase through Los Angeles, Whatever's left of the movie's focus can only be found in the work of Gibson, Good and Larenz Tate as O's ne'er-do-well cousin.
 
 'Waist Deep'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for strong violence and pervasive language   

 "Waist Deep," directed by Vondie Curtis Hall, is unapologetically a B movie, its narrative premise whittled down to a mean little nub and placed carefully on the borderline between the wildly implausible and the completely absurd. Its hero, a former gangster known as O2 (Tyrese Gibson), is knocked off his post-prison commitment to the straight and narrow by the kidnapping of his young son (H. Hunter Hall).  With the occasional help of his unpredictable cousin Lucky (Larenz Tate) and the more steadfast though initially reluctant assistance of a beautiful hustler named Coco (Meagan Good), O2 does what any father would. He incites a gang war in the streets of Los Angeles and hits a few banks while he's at it, before finally collecting the payback he is owed by the machete-wielding one-eyed villain, an uber-criminal named Big Meat (the hip-hop star the Game).  Mr. Hall, an actor whose other directorial efforts include the Mariah Carey vehicle "Glitter" and "Redemption," which starred Jamie Foxx as the former gang leader Tookie Williams, transacts this bit of genre business with an aggressive sense of style and a surprising dose of sentiment. The swiveling, jittery camera movements, the extreme, off-center close-ups and the attention to urban geography recall "Collateral," Michael Mann's recent exercise in nocturnal Los Angeles noir.  It may be that "Waist Deep," beautifully shot by Shane Hurlbut, looks better than it is. There is plenty here to make you roll your eyes or glance at your watch. But hovering over the fistfights, gun battles and car chases is an aura of melancholy: a blend of frustration, fatigue and paternal guilt that is interesting and unusual.  Yes, this strain of feeling culminates in one of the most audaciously maudlin endings this side of "Beaches."  But the film's first scene, in which O2 rushes from his job as a department store security guard to pick up Junior, stopping to buy him a toy on the way out, has an emotional impact that may prove hard to shake.  Mr. Gibson's sheer physical presence — he has the gravity of a carved and polished block of stone — can sometimes overshadow his skill as an actor, and can sometimes bring it into high relief. You might not expect flashes of sweetness, anxiety or deadpan humor from someone so muscular and imposing, but there they are. Ms. Good, for her part, is less convincing when the script (by Mr. Hall and Darin Scott) calls for deep maternal feeling than when it requires theatrical displays of seductiveness or brass.  There is some wit in the movie as well, an undercurrent of the tart social insight that distinguished the best of the early blaxploitation pictures. O2 and Coco's lightning crime spree — three banks in a single day, plus a few scams and home invasions — takes place while the streets are full of angry citizens protesting gang violence. The social critic and scholar Michael Eric Dyson is heard on the radio, and the current police chief and mayor of Los Angeles are called out by name. For a time the two fugitives — "a modern-day Bonnie and Clyde," according to an admiring convenience store clerk — hole up in an elegant Modernist house in the Hollywood Hills, a retreat that emphasizes the chasms of racial and class inequality that define the Southern California landscape.  Whatever its throwaway title is supposed to mean, "Waist Deep" is not as shallow as you might expect.  "Waist Deep" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has pervasive violence and profanity.

Doing very little to dispel Los Angeles' reputation as a hotbed of gangland vendettas, voluptuous streetwalkers and some of the worst traffic on the planet, "Waist Deep" packs considerable energy and style into its tale of an ex-con forced back into a life of crime to rescue his kidnapped son. Yet the kinetic direction and occasional sly humor can't disguise the tale's banal brutality or pump much excitement into its routinized pileup of shoot-outs and car chases. Strong cast led by Tyrese Gibson will stir interest among urban auds, but "Deep's" B.O. penetration looks pretty shallow. 
Singer-model Gibson, who won raves for his performance as an irresponsible single dad in John Singleton's "Baby Boy" (2001), here embodies a more mature variation on the same role -- a recent parolee named O2 (short for Oxygen) who, having spent six years in prison, is trying to turn over a new leaf.
Yet where "Baby Boy" set out to map the genome of a specific kind of African-American male, "Waist Deep" has little on its brain beyond providing 97 minutes of visceral, propulsive and socially irresponsible entertainment. For all helmer Vondie Curtis Hall's aspirations to grittiness, his script (co-written by Darin Scott) is mired in a violent fantasy L.A. where the stereotypes fly almost as fast as the bullets.
In an explosive and impressively economical opening, O2 is carjacked by a thug who drives off with his boy, Junior (played by the director's son, H. Hunter Hall), still in the backseat. Using the weapon issued him at his new job as a security guard, O2 initiates a bloody gunfight that quickly wipes out his hopes of going straight, while establishing the revved-up editing and handheld camerawork that constitute pic's jangly aesthetic.
O2 soon finds an unlikely ally in Coco (the scintillating Meagan Good), a gorgeous prostitute with whom he locked eyes shortly before the carjacking. She agrees to help him track down Junior, who is being held captive by Meat (rap artist the Game, sporting a prosthetic gouged-out eye), a crime boss so fearsome he's introduced cutting off a lackey's hand.
Meat, who shares a bitter history with O2, demands $100,000 ransom for Junior's safe return. In response, O2 and Coco turn renegade and set off on a wild crime spree to acquire the money, deliberately stirring up a war between Meat's syndicate and Coco's pimp in the process.
Comparisons to "Bonnie and Clyde" are unmistakable and deliberately suggested by the film, though the duo's strategy of cleverly switching disguises from one robbery to the next, as well as the pic's utter lack of moral gravity, are more reminiscent of "Fun With Dick and Jane."
"Waist Deep" is at its most engaging when it allows a breezy lightness of tone to slip into the otherwise grim proceedings. Good, the strikingly assured young actress from "Brick" and "Roll Bounce," steals one scene after another as the hilariously resourceful Coco -- causing a diverting ruckus in a bank one moment, verbally seducing a suspicious police officer the next.
But the pic sacrifices its sense of humor for a series of predictably written, staged and shot action set pieces, beginning with the inevitable confrontation between O2 and Meat and ending with a long and extremely loud high-speed car chase.
Script attempts a topical spin by setting the action within the parameters of an all-day anticrime rally on the streets of L.A., with a number of pointed references to real-life Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa. It's never clear, however, whether helmer Hall intends the rally to function as rebuke or ironic counterpoint to the action. In any event, it would take a smarter film than this to be able to critique gang violence and at the same time glorify it so relentlessly.
Gibson's smoldering, subdued performance conveys both the violent desperation and the essential decency of a father figure having his arm twisted, while Larenz Tate creates a quietly memorable figure as O2's ironically named gangbanger cousin, Lucky. Young Hall, however, could have used a mite more direction as the terrorized tot.
Shane Hurlbut's widescreen cinematography, with its occasionally ripe, oversaturated colors, expertly captures the sweat and sizzle of an L.A. afternoon. Soundtrack's abundant hip-hop riffs occasionally double as catchy intro music for the characters, ably complementing Terence Blanchard's pulsing score.

Vondie Curtis Hall 's irrational and contradictory crime thriller stars Tyrese Gibson  (2 Fast 2 Furious ) as an indestructible ex-con who, with a sullen but sizzling L.A. streetwalker (Meagan Good ), sets out to find his kidnapped son. They raise ransom money on a well-publicized 24-hour crime spree and put two rival street gangs to rout in the process. Supposedly a contemporary Bonnie and Clyde , this is really a tacit endorsement of greedy gangsta life vaguely disguised within a morality play: The Hummers and the heavy artillery of the hip-hopping bad guys look like glossy magazine ads. For its ever shifting attitudes toward men, women, and murder, Waist Deep  is one of the sloppiest movies ever to reach the screen. With rapper the Game  as a one-eyed gang kingpin called Big Meat, whose specialty is chopping arms off disloyal underlings.
