         The new Israeli film "Walk on Water" is complex and paradoxical, at times frustrating but always involving. Something like the country that produced it.
 
  Extremely wide-ranging in what it hopes to capture in its net, "Walk on Water" touches on cultural, political, historical and even sexual issues. The past collides, pinball-like, with the present, and suppressed emotions careen into those readily available — all of which may make you wish that director Eytan Fox and screenwriter Gal Uchovsky had been somewhat less ambitious. But then this wouldn't be the film it is.
 


         






    "Walk on Water" takes its title from the pureness of heart one would theoretically need to duplicate Jesus' celebrated action. It deals, in general terms, with the consequences of giving an enemy a human face.
 
  At first, though, "Walk" has the feeling of a more conventional espionage thriller. We watch as Eyal, a top agent for the super-secret Mossad, coolly and efficiently goes about his risky business overseas.
 
  As played by the darkly charismatic Lior Ashkenazi (who starred in the splendid "Late Marriage"), Eyal manages to be likable as well as a merciless hard case, someone who is used to keeping his emotions under tight control.
 
  But when he returns home to Israel, Eyal has to confront a personal tragedy. Though deeply shaken, he is gung-ho enough to be eager to return to work. However, Menachem (Gidon Shemer), his handler at Mossad, is not so sure and wants to use Eyal for purposes of his own.
 
  It seems Menachem has been tracking an escaped Nazi mass murderer named Alfred Himmelman for decades. Now it turns out that the man's granddaughter Pia (Carolina Peters) has moved to Israel and her brother Axel (Knut Berger) is coming for a visit.
 
  The siblings have requested a tour guide and Menachem wants the German-speaking Eyal to show up, plant an electronic bug and eavesdrop on their conversations in hopes of getting a line on Himmelman's whereabouts.
 
  If this sounds complicated, it is only the setup for "Walk on Water's" over-elaborate plot, which tries, mostly with success, to walk the line between holding our interest and giving in to melodrama.
 
  Also a bit of a problem is that, since Eyal's knowledge of German is to remain a secret, the only language he and the siblings can acknowledge having in common is English.
 
  A good part of the film's dialogue is in that language, which, understandably, does not show the actors in their best possible light.
 
  Balanced against this are the fascinating areas of contemporary tension and conflict that "Walk on Water" has the spirit to investigate, starting with the difficulties today's descendants of Holocaust-era Germans and Jews have in finding common ground.
 
  This situation spills over into the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Axel determined to befriend the Palestinians, and Eyal, who refers to him privately as "a patronizing German peacenik," enraged that he cares.
 
  "Think of how desperate these people must be," says Axel of the suicide bombers, which leads to the furious rejoinder, "There's nothing to think about, they're animals." The possibility that Israelis may be using sufferings of the past to blind them to painful current realities is one of the points this film clearly wants to make.
 
  Yet another area of tension between the men is sexual, with Eyal smolderingly heterosexual and Axel unapologetically homosexual.
 
  Director Fox's last film, "Yossi & Jagger," dealt with the romance between two male Israeli soldiers, and it's nice to see him using sexual difference as one element in a more wide-ranging scenario.
 
  While there's likely no way all these topics can fit smoothly and comfortably into the same film, it is fascinating to watch them try.
 
  "Walk on Water" does not always convince, but with its interest in a range of issues that matter, it always has our full attention.
 
 'Walk on Water'

 
 MPAA rating:
 Unrated
 
 Times guidelines:
 Adult subject matter
 
 Lior Ashkenazi
...Eyal
 
 Knut Berger
...Axel Himmelman
 
 Carolina Peters
...Pia Himmelman
 
 Gidon Shemer
...Menachem
 
 Roadside Attractions and Samuel Goldwyn Films present a Lama Films production, released by Samuel Goldwyn Films. Director Eytan Fox. Producers Amir Harel, Gal Uchovsky. Screenplay Gal Uchovsky. Cinematographer Tobias Hochstein. Editor Yosef Grunfeld. Costumes Rona Doron, Peter Pohl. Music Ivri Lider. Art directors Avi Fahima, Christoph Merg. Running time: 1 hour, 44 minutes. In limited release.   

he director Eytan Fox had an unexpected international success in 2002 with "Yossi and Jagger," a gay love story set against the unlikely backdrop of the Israel Defense Forces. With "Walk on Water," his third feature-length film, Mr. Fox takes on the even more controversial subject of Israeli nationalism in the aftermath of the Holocaust. In fact, there isn't much that "Walk on Water" doesn't take on, from global terrorism and Israeli-Palestinian relations to homophobia in the Mossad, the Israeli security service. Eyal (Lior Ashkenazi) is a Mossad special agent with a brusque, sardonic manner and a marked lack of sentiment for the terrorists he targets for assassination; asked to speculate on their motivations, he barks, "What's to think? They're animals." After an unexpected tragedy in Eyal's personal life, his supervisor (Gidon Shemer) sends him on an unusual assignment: to track down a Nazi war criminal in hiding, Eyal must pose as a tour guide to spy on the old man's adult grandchildren. This brother-and-sister pair, Axel and Pia (wonderfully played by Knut Berger and Carolina Peters), are just the sort of well-meaning bourgeois liberals that grate on Eyal's nerves, but as he drives Axel around the historical sites of Israel, he begins to feel an affinity for the gentle, soft-spoken boy. When Axel drags his host to a gay bar (and adds insult to injury by flirting with a Palestinian Arab), the macho Eyal withdraws abruptly, asking to be removed from the case. But later Eyal makes a trip to Germany that forces both men to reconsider their political and erotic allegiances. "Walk on Water" is an odd bird, a slight-feeling indie film that slowly builds into a substantial meditation on contemporary politics, sexual and otherwise. Though it is marred by an implausible climax and a cloying conclusion, this movie's quiet intelligence sneaks up on you, marking the director as a talent to watch.

A triple threat for gay, Jewish and German film festivals, Berlinale Panorama-opener "Walk on Water" attempts the miraculous but achieves the adequate. With its story of a Mossad assassin humanized through his relationship with the German grandchildren of a Nazi war criminal -- one of them a gay man -- helmer Eytan Fox probes themes that bubbled up nicely in his sophomore effort, the Israeli Army closet story "Yossi and Jagger." However, an overly schematic, deeply flawed script and wan perfs keep this from being a crossover crowd-pleaser. "Walk" is likely to struggle in the shallows outside its best-bet Israeli and German markets.
After a tight, Istanbul-set prologue showing main character Eyal (Lior Ashkenazi, "Late Marriage") in action killing a Hamas leader, film sets up an interesting narrative by throwing hawkish, macho Eyal into instant conflict with liberal, cosmopolitan German siblings Axel and Pia Himmelman (Knut Berger and Carolina Peters, respectively). Eyal's assignment is to pose as tour guide while Axel visits his kibbutz-dwelling sister, and to learn the whereabouts of their war-criminal grandpapa Alfred, with whom Eyal's dead mother and avuncular Mossad controller Menachem (Gidon Shemer) had tragic dealings during WWII.
Fox and Uchovsky manage to work some nuance into first two acts. Eyal's rattled sense of self after the suicide of his wife Iris (Nataly Szylman) mirrors German characters' shame about their country's -- and family's --past.
However, all along the way, the plot seems to be chugging toward coupling Eyal and Axel, classic opposites who might attract, starting with scenes where they shower together and discuss their foreskins or lack thereof (before the at-first homophobic Eyal realizes Axel's gay), to the moment Eyal shows up in Berlin looking like a lovelorn puppy. There's manifestly more chemistry between the two men than between Eyal and the woefully underwritten Pia, who seems crowbarred into the happy ending.
Worse, in the climactic Berlin section, the main players are asked to perform seemingly totally out of character. And still other characters pop up out of nowhere for no good reason. Further, a poorly staged fight with some neo-Nazis is jerry-rigged into the mix. Suspension of belief is completely shattered when, after Eyal pulls a gun on the thugs, Axel's first question is, "Why did you bring that?" not "How the hell did you ever get that on a plane from Israel?" as any normal person would ask.
The three comely leads tend to deliver lines in a monotone, especially when speaking in English.
Tech credits are glossy enough to disguise pic's peskier flaws at first, with Tobias Hochstein's colorful, sun-seared lensing a standout. Music is mostly source, and makes great narrative play with one-hit wonder, Europop tune "Cinderella Rockafella," originally recorded by Esther and Abi Ofarim in the late 1960s.
Camera (color), Tobias Hochstein; editor, Yosef Grunfeld; music, Ivri Lider; art directors, Avi Fahima, Christoph Merg; costumes designers, Rona Doron, Peter Pohl; sound (Dolby Digital 5.1), Gil Toren; assistant directors, Tamar Ichilov, Michael Johnson; casting, Yael Aviv, Chun Mei Tan. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama), Feb. 6, 2004. Running time: 102 MIN.

 


Israeli filmmaker Eytan Fox , who directed Yossi & Jagger , a surprise hit about two male lovers in the Israeli army , again scales the heights of Middle Eastern machismo with this story of Eyal (Lior Ashkenazi ), a ruthless Mossad  agent whose new assignment proves peculiarly challenging. Pia (Caroline Peters ), the granddaughter of an aging Nazi war criminal, has emigrated from Germany to a kibbutz in Israel ; her brother Axel (Knut Berger ) is coming to visit. Posing as his tour guide, Eyal must snoop to discover their grandfather's whereabouts.
It's not his kind of thing. Eyal is a man of action, of black-and-white moral contrasts, shaped by his parents' experiences as German Jews and by decades of life-and-death struggles with Arabs. Axel's empathy with the Palestinian cause and fondness for gay bars soon get on his nerves. But revelations are in store for everyone. Fox sets up the tensions of a dynamic thriller and keeps them in play. Eyal and Axel are vividly drawn, but the female characters remain opaque, and historically, Fox might have bitten off more than he can chew. The complex questions Walk on Water  raises receive only confused answers.
