         Wallace and Gromit are ready for their close-up. And do we ever need them now.
 
  Superstars of comic short films, this intrepid clay animation duo makes its much-anticipated move to features in the irresistible "Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit," puckishly characterized by creator Nick Park as "the first vegetarian horror movie ever."
 


         






    In a movie culture in which creativity is often strangled in its cradle, it is both welcome and astonishing to see how successful Park's unlikely pairing of his own idiosyncratic sensibility with the most labor-intensive form of animation has become. "It was simply my own taste, the kind of film I wanted to see," the film's British co-writer and co-director said at Cannes about Wallace and Gromit's origins. "It always astonishes me how universal it's become."
 
  Park's joining more than 15 years ago of a genially hapless inventor who's mad for cheese and his poker-faced know-it-all silent dog has led to three Oscar nominations and two statuettes for the dynamic duo. Park delayed the team's feature debut, which boasts Helena Bonham Carter and Ralph Fiennes as voice talent, until he could come up with a plot worthy of their shenanigans, and he has.
 
  Working with a trio of co-writers (Steve Box, who also co-directed, Bob Baker and Mark Burton, all previous collaborators), Park and company came up with the notion of a werewolf movie about rabbits who were ravenous for vegetables, not human flesh.
 
  Those familiar with classics like "Frankenstein" and "The Wolf Man" will be charmed by how well the tropes of horror lend themselves to this kind of spoofing, and viewers of all sorts will be delighted with a film that puts a smile on your face and leaves it there for the duration.
 
  Undaunted by previous mishaps, Wallace remains the epitome of Gyro Gearloose madcap inventing, coming up with wacky machines like the Mind-O-Matic and the Bun-Vac 6000. He still loves cheese (who else has books like "East of Edam" and "Fromage to Eternity" in his library shelves) and still gets despairing looks of polite disbelief from Gromit, the only dog whose hobby is knitting.
 
  What is different is the pair's new business, a humane, cruelty-free way to rid gardens of invading rabbits that goes by the name of Anti-Pesto. It's an especially booming business in Wallace and Gromit's neck of the woods, a neighborhood obsessed with its Giant Vegetable Competition, in particular the impending 517th annual edition.
 
  Then, when the moon is full, there appears on the scene a monstrous rabbit with the strength of 10, teeth the size of ax blades and ears like terrible tombstones. He lays waste to the neighborhood produce and enables the filmmakers, as Park explains, "to use typical horror movie characters like the skeptical policeman and a vicar who spouts all kinds of mumbo-jumbo about the beast within."
 
  Especially energized by the disaster is Lady Tottington (Bonham Carter), bestower of the prized Golden Carrot, a local eco-toff who wants the beast humanely removed. Being something of a peerage groupie, Wallace (voiced as he has since the beginning by Peter Sallis) is only too eager to oblige. But standing in the way is milady's bloodthirsty suitor, Victor Quartermaine (Fiennes), who is determined to blow everything that moves to Kingdom Come.
 
  The last thing you expect from a "Wallace & Gromit" film is crackling plot twists, but "Curse of the Were-Rabbit" boasts a few. It also has the kind of wonderful cartoon chases that were a beloved feature of the shorts as well as a riff on "King Kong" and a monster transformation sequence that is a treat.
 
  Most of all, "Wallace & Gromit" retains the clever, one-of-a-kind sensibility that made its shorter predecessors so delightful. With every studio comedy looking for a formula for success, it's refreshing to find a heroically whimsical film that succeeds by following no formula known to dog or man.
 
  Though "Wallace & Gromit" makes some use of computer-generated images for story elements like fog, its characters are still created frame by painstaking frame in the old-fashioned stop-motion way. The process is so meticulous, taking days to produce seconds of finished film, that "Curse of the Were-Rabbit" took nearly five years to finish, including an 18-month shooting schedule. That's a lot of work for an 85-minute film, but, if you want to know the truth, it was worth every second.
 
 
'Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit'

 
 MPAA rating:
 G
 
 Times guidelines:
 Mild transformation sequence
 
 Released by DreamWorks SKG. Directors Nick Park, Steve Box. Producers Peter Lord, David Sproxton, Nick Park, Claire Jennings, Carla Shelley. Executive producers Michael Rose, Cecil Kramer. Screenplay Steve Box & Nick Park, Bob Baker and Mark Burton. Cinematographers Dave Alex Riddett, Tristan Oliver. Editors David McCormick, Gregory Perler. Music Julian Nott. Production design Phil Lewis. Running time: 1 hour, 25 minutes. In general release.   

I hadn't realized just how hungry I had been for a lovely bit of cheese — I mean, for a tasty chunk of Nick Park art and philosophy — until the familiar, bouncy theme music that announces the arrival of Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit  got me salivating. Here, in the nick of time, is a cheeky pip-pip and  hip-hip-hooray for the British virtues of decency, class consciousness, and well-tended garden vegetables! Finally, we have news of the daft, Wensleydale-loving, clay-animated English inventor Wallace and his resourceful, long-suffering canine companion Gromit, last seen on the big screen a decade ago in the Oscar-winning short A Close Shave .
In their first feature-length adventure, the duo operate a profitable pest-control business, win the affection of a trilling noblewoman, outwit the schemes of a twitty upper-class gent, and defeat a ravaging, mutant beast come to wreak havoc on the townsfolk's gardens in scenes that bear no small semblance to those in Universal horror classics. In short, the symbiotic pair generally display the absurd virtues of plucky Englishness and extravagant Laurel-and-Hardy luck in the face of chaos that have made W&G such feet-of-clay heroes for 16 years, and have put the Aardman Animation chaps on the map.
The challenge this time for Park and his codirector, Steve Box, is to give fans what we've been waiting for while bringing newcomers to the W&G household up to date on the couple's domestic partnership. Mission: Accomplished. It takes but a few scenes of morning routine in which the two are roused, dressed, and fed via a series of Rube Goldberg-inspired gizmos to establish that Wallace (voiced to perfection, as ever, by Peter Sallis) is the inventor but not necessarily the smarter of the two, and that the silent Gromit (with infinitely expressive eyes that communicate a thousand shades of ''heaven help me'' and ''here's another fine mess you've gotten us into'') is actually the brains in the family.
Then it's off to the fair, or at least to the days leading up to the annual Giant Vegetable Competition, days in which the garden-proud local populace retains W&G's ''Anti-Pesto'' services to deal humanely with any rabbits that may threaten the well-being of competition veggies. (Wallace's innovative Bun-Vac 6000 painlessly sucks the little hoppers up into a holding vat, then blows them into pens at the proprietors' home to become supervised guests.) But the good work they do for grand Lady Tottington (voiced with a knack for being an animated fancy lady by Helena Bonham Carter) doesn't sit well with Tottie's pompous, scheming suitor, Victor Quartermaine (Ralph Fiennes, letting rip with lusty glee) — he'd much rather blast the varmints — and soon Victor has his sights on shutting down the W&G operation, too.
The movie rollicks with visual slapstick, puns, and drive-by joke-cluster bombs that fall on young and adult viewers alike with such good aim (in the Chicken Run  style, which is highest praise indeed) that it's easy to forget that it took Park, Box, and their devoted team five labor-intensive years to move these clay townspeople and bunnies and lycanthropes with stop-motion precision. (The thumbprints intentionally left on the subjects are marks of monomaniacal love.) For all the obsession required by the technical demands of this joyous hand-made film, man, dog, and human handlers never appear to break a sweat. The Curse of the Were-Rabbit  bestows generous blessings on all that's good in Englishness, in moviedom, and, of course, in cheese.

 I hope you will forgive me for saying so - and I hope the filmmakers will forgive me, too - but "Wallace and Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" has forced me to ponder the deepest mysteries of cinema. Why, for instance, do certain faces haunt and move us as they do?  I am thinking of Gromit, the mute and loyal animated dog whose selflessness and intelligence can be counted on, when things get really crazy, to save the day. Gromit has no mouth, and yet his face is one of the most expressive ever committed to the screen. In particular, his brow - a protuberance overhanging his spherical, googly eyes - is an almost unmatched register of emotion. Resignation, worry, tenderness and disgust all come alive in that plasticine nub. To keep matters within the DreamWorks menagerie, you might compare Gromit to Shrek, who has the genetic advantages of Mike Myers's Scots burr, a bevy of celebrity-voiced sidekicks and rivals, and state-of-the-art computer-animation technology. Good for him. But Gromit, made by hand and animated by a painstaking stop-motion process, has something Shrek will never acquire in a hundred sequels: a soul.  And this unassuming pooch's feature film debut, after appearances in three sublime half-hour shorts, is thus a solemn occasion (even if the movie itself is utterly silly). His face now enters the pantheon of stars whose charisma transcends speech. Keaton, Chaplin, Garbo - let them now make room for Gromit. Which is in no way to slight Wallace, his entrepreneurial owner, who speaks in the voice of Peter Sallis and who personifies all the traditional virtues of the provincial English middle class. (His shortcomings are entirely his own, of course.)  Anyway, "The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" finds master and hound running a pest-control company specializing in the humane disposal of rabbits. These creatures are infesting the local gardens on the eve of an important vegetable competition, imperiling giant pumpkins and carrots as well as Gromit's prize melon.  Sheltering the bunnies threatens to overwhelm Wallace and Gromit's modest household, and so Wallace invents a device that will cure their craving for fresh produce, with predictably disastrous results. What I mean is that it is predictable that the results will be disastrous, but the particular shape of the disaster springs with delightful surprise from the imaginations of Nick Park and Steve Box, who directed the film, and Mark Burton and Bob Baker, with whom they wrote it. They have also assembled a fine supporting cast of bounders, ninnies and local biddies, notably a pompadoured villain named Victor (voiced by Ralph Fiennes) and his aristocratic would-be fiancée, the flame-haired, green-thumbed Lady Tottington (trilled by Helena Bonham Carter), otherwise known as Totty.  That nickname is mildly naughty British slang, and there are a few other hints of bawdiness in the movie, adding a dash of Benny Hill vulgarity that is entirely appropriate to its sensibility. The animation is a marvel - all the more so because the most demanding sequences seem almost casually tossed off. The world of Wallace and Gromit is one of the few genuinely eccentric places left in the movies, a place where lumpy, doughy characters achieve a peculiar dignity in spite of their grotesque features and the ridiculousness of their circumstances.  It is a world I have been longing to revisit ever since my children wore out the tapes of "A Close Shave" (formerly known in our house as "the one with the mean dog"), "The Wrong Trousers" ("the one with the mean bird") and "A Grand Day Out" ("the one when they go to the moon"). I was a bit worried that more superficially sophisticated pleasures - "Lizzie Maguire" or whatever tweener sitcoms the kids are into these days - had eroded the appeal of Wallace and Gromit, but I need not have. We all had a marvelous time. Perhaps it was the giant furry were-rabbit, or maybe the twinkle of romance between Wallace and Totty, or even the uplifting and nutritious pro-vegetable message (which resonates with the implicit vegetarianism of Mr. Park and Peter Lord's "Chicken Run"). All of that and more, I'm sure. But for me, most of all, it was Gromit's forehead, which gave me renewed appreciation for the magic of movies. If only I had a dog like that.

As quintessentially British in flavor as a wedge of Wensleydale, "Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" reps the long-awaited feature outing for helmer Nick Park's Plasticine pals, here up against a mutant rabbit. Although DreamWorks' slightly coarsening fingerprints are visible in places, Park and co-helmer Steve Box stay faithful to the cozy core ingredients that made the clay duo's kudo-reaping shorts and Park's previous pic, "Chicken Run," so well loved. "Curse" delivers a wholesome morsel, happily not too cheesy, that families will nibble on as a treat this autumn before making a real meal of it on ancillary.
First introduced in Park's film school final project "A Grand Day Out" (which was nominated for an Oscar) and met again in the follow-up, "The Wrong Trousers" (which won an Oscar), Wallace (voiced by veteran thesp Peter Sallis) and Gromit (who never speaks) are one man and his dog, respectively.
Living in a tidy terraced house in a suburban corner of Northern England that looks stranded somewhere in the 1940s, the two take trips to the moon (in "Out") and confrontations with larcenous penguins (in "Trousers") in their stride. An archetypal chalk-and-cheese double act, dairy product-loving Wallace and his smarter pooch Gromit (arguably as great a silent comedian as Jacques Tati or even Buster Keaton) have a passion for building Heath Robinson-style labor-saving devices.
Here, they've put their mechanical talents to work to build a security company called Anti-Pesto that patrols via remote control the backyard plots of their gardening-mad town. The annual giant vegetable competition is approaching, and Wallace and Gromit are kept busy humanely extracting foliage-fancying rabbits from the ground with their Bun-Vac 6000. (They keep the mischievous rabbits afterward as pets.)
When Wallace, with Gromit's help, successfully fixes the lapine woes of pretty local toff Lady Tottington (Helena Bonham Carter, on her second animated outing this year after "Corpse Bride"), winning her regard in the process, he attracts the jealous eye of scheming Victor Quartermaine (Ralph Fiennes). Quartermaine thinks shooting is a better method of pest control and wants Lady "Totty" for his bride.
Wallace ends up making more trouble for everyone when he hooks the Bun-Vac up to his latest invention, the Mind-O-Matic, hoping to brain-wash the rabbits into not wanting to eat vegetables at all. The experiment backfires, and soon a giant "were-rabbit" -- seen in classic horror movie-style only in glimpses and shadow outline at first -- starts ravaging the town's gardens, turning the placid locals into an angry mob.
This first third somewhat reprises in bigger-budget form the same shticks from Park's earlier shorts (such as the complicated contraptions that put Wallace in his trademark trousers and knitted vest for breakfast), but it helps bring viewers new to the duo up to speed with their world.
Similarly, pic's grand finale at the vegetable fete, although featuring entirely original slapstick sight gags and quite excitingly assembled indeed, feels as if it's sticking to the template laid down at the end of "Trousers," which was refined further in "Chicken Run."
Nevertheless, all the crisply paced stuff in between these bookends is consistently charming. Park and his usual screenwriting collaborator Bob Baker's taste for poky, understated humor (Wallace's typical reaction to catastrophe is to moan softly, "Oh, dear!") meshes well with Mark Burton, co-scribe for DreamWorks' "Madagascar," who might be supposed to be responsible for pic's broader comic touches, such as a tired gag that places a pair of melons right in front of Totty's breasts for an "Austin Powers"-style double entendre.
Many of the knowing, pun-tastic "Shrek"-lite jokes lurking in the background here feel self-consciously aimed at tickling grownups' funny bones, such as a row of books hiding Wallace's secret cheese store with titles like "East of Edam" and "Grated Expectations." Another big wink comes when a snatch of Art Garfunkel's song "Bright Eyes," the theme for rabbit-themed toon "Watership Down," is heard on a car stereo. Overall, this feels a smidge less genuinely innocent than the original Aardman shorts.
Where "Curse" really shines, and also stays true to its roots, is in the animation department. Character design is faithful to the endearingly lumpy look, with thumbprints deliberately left unsmoothed, that's become shingle Aardman and Park's trademark. The sparing but wonderfully expressive work put into Gromit's looks and gestures is simply bravura stuff. Merchandisers affiliated with the franchise should be delighted.
Animation team makes the painstaking job of individually moving characters in big crowd scenes look effortless, even with pic's tens of rabbit extras. Deploying CGI in subtle but strategic way, latter warren of critters is seen spinning in the Bun-Vac, an effect done in an entirely different medium that is kept from looking too incongruous with the jerkier stop-motion animation by inserting tiny stutters in the movement.
Camerawork will likewise impress animation geeks with tricky low tracks through foliage in the action scenes. Lighting is cleverly deployed to make figures pop out more, even in night scenes. The rest of the production design underscores retro vibe while offering more pleasingly rough textures in hair and clothes that will prove particularly attractive to underage viewers, who will sit mesmerized through pic's trim running time.
For the record, onscreen title of print caught was "The Curse of the Were-Rabbit," which appeared in the wake of portraits of the two leading characters.

Though Wallace and Gromit , turophile inventor and canny canine, have only made four appearances in 16 years, the plasticine pair captures the dim-bright appeal of some classic British duos—Wooster and Jeeves, Watson and Holmes. Wallace (voiced by Peter Sallis ) has technical ingenuity but lacks common sense; his mute, goal-oriented sidekick exists in a state of exasperation and melancholy, the only cure for which is a nail-biting bout of derring-do.
What creator Nick Park  (no relation!), with the help of the Aardman Animations  team, lacks in oeuvre output, he makes up in charming intricacy. A Grand Day Out  (1989) is an elegantly austere fantasia in which man and dog voyage to the moon in search of cheese, simply because there's none left in the house; the two brilliant follow-ups, The Wrong Trousers  (1993) and A Close Shave  (1995), keep things on earth while piling on additional critters, visual and verbal games, ever more elaborate chases, and dizzying devices of Rube Goldberg  complexity. Amplifying the joys of this well-oiled machinery is time itself: It's fitting that the glacial stop-motion animation process should result in the construction of a more handcrafted era, an ambience of free-floating nostalgia in which every detail—wallpaper, a knit-sweater pattern, a refrigerator logo—is half remembered before being enjoyed.
Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit , co-directed by Park and Steve Box , happily extends the heroes' small-scale allure to feature length. Once dedicated to cleaning windows with the assistance of bungee cords, Wallace and Gromit have now taken up humane vermin removal under the banner Anti-Pesto. Their job is crucial: Tottington Hall 's annual Giant Vegetable Competition looms, and the townsfolk's prize pumpkins and monster squashes are tempting targets for late-night-snack- attacking rabbits. Luckily, Anti-Pesto has installed constant gardeners of a sort—gnome statuettes with infrared eyes that act as trip wires. Motion triggers an alarm chez Wallace that wakes him by proffering a plate of cheese to his dreaming nose, only to withdraw it and have his head smack the wall.
As in Park's 2000 non-W&G Chicken Run , there's a firm stance against cruelty to animals—but the superior Curse  adds a nice reductio ad absurdum in which we feel sorry for the ravaged veggies too, as a mysterious gargantuan herbivore starts making the rounds. Lady Tottington (voiced by Helena Bonham Carter ), whose mouth structure suggests a shared bloodline with Mr. Bill and whose hair resembles a steel-wool baguette, proclaims with pampered authority, "I believe the killing of fluffy creatures is never justified." But even when said f.c. is capable of massive destruction? Her trigger-happy, Elvis-coiffed toff of a suitor, Victor Quartermaine (Ralph Fiennes ), is only too happy to go on the hunt, sensing that Wallace is a rival for Lady T.'s affections.
Curse  has echoes from the previous W&G outings—the captured bunnies recall the voracious sheep in A Close Shave  , and one of the critters even starts to speak in Wallace-isms (after an ill-advised bit of "brain alteration"). But this latest and biggest installment is a whimsical success of a very high order: The pace never lags, the invention is incessant, and it makes you want to have a bite of cheese afterward.
