 “War, Inc.” is gonzo moviemaking with a bleeding heart. A satirical farce that wants to be “Dr. Strangelove” for the age of terrorism, it is a zany, nihilistic free-for-all that goes soft.  Giving in to sentiment is an impulse to which Stanley Kubrick, the director of “Dr. Strangelove,” whose influence permeates “War, Inc.,” would never have succumbed. A prolonged battle scene set to the “Blue Danube” waltz  is pure Kubrick, but it is executed by the director Joshua Seftel without the same icy sense of the absurd. Like much else in the movie, it seems merely derivative.  What bracing misanthropy “War, Inc.” is able to conjure in its early scenes is sabotaged by the presence of the film’s prime mover, John Cusack, an actor who even when playing the ultimate cynic can’t keep from coming across as a misguided nice guy on the verge of seeing the light. Mr. Cusack, who also wrote the screenplay with Mark Leyner and Jeremy Pikser and is one of the film’s several producers, stars as Hauser, a samurai-style hit man dispatched to the Middle East in the near future on an assassination mission.  Playing a classic lone gunman and kung fu master with a deadly glint in his eyes while Morricone-style cowboy music twangs in the background, Mr. Cusack still looks and sounds like a softy. His destination is the Emerald City (read the Green Zone) in the fictional Turaqistan (read Iraq), a country occupied by Tamerlane (read Halliburton), a corporation run by an unnamed former vice president of the United States (Dan Aykroyd, doing a dead-on parody of Dick Cheney).  Snarling out of one corner of his mouth while sitting on a toilet, the vice president boasts that the continuing conflict between Tamerlane and insurgent forces is the first war ever outsourced to private enterprise. As a trade show begins, a chorus line of women with prosthetic legs dances. Their prostheses are Tamerlane products.  His aide, Marsha Dillon (Joan Cusack), is an enraged sourpuss who suggests an exponentially more disagreeable Mary Matalin. Ms. Cusack’s harshly funny portrayal, and the performances of Mr. Aykroyd and of Ben Kingsley as Walken, an evil puppetmaster and C.I.A. honcho, are the movie’s strongest because their characters don’t have souls. This being a satire, why should they?  Hauser’s assignment is to kill Omar Sharif (Lubomir Neikov), an upstart Middle Eastern oil minister who wants to build his own pipeline through Turaqistan, thwarting Tamerlane’s intention to corner the country’s natural resources. Outside the Emerald City, where Hauser occasionally ventures, Turaqistan appears to have been already reduced to rubble. But the battle rages on, and chaos reigns.  The cover story for Hauser’s visit is his job description as producer of the Brand USA Trade Show, whose centerpiece will be the wedding of Yonica Babyyeah (Hilary Duff), the Britney Spears of Central Asia. Ms. Duff breaks out of her everygirl persona to play this spoiled, squirming kohl-eyed vamp, who growls “I Want to Blow You Up” with every innuendo intact and travels with a posse of ersatz gangsters. Inside this predatory tramp, however, beats the heart of a lost little girl.  Hauser, the tough guy who swigs shots of hot sauce without shedding a tear, falls in love with Natalie Hegalhuzen (Marisa Tomei), a liberal journalist who shows up on the scene. When she is kidnapped and threatened with beheading after venturing outside the Emerald City, Hauser gets to play the hero.  You can sense the rage and disgust simmering behind  “War, Inc.,” but they seldom reach a full boil. The movie is repeatedly sidetracked as it glimpses new satirical targets. A particularly distracting cause célèbre is a plan to market a pornographic video of Yonica’s wedding night.  The problem with gonzo moviemaking, in this case, is that nothing really adds up. What initially appears whimsical eventually seems sloppy. And when the bleeding heart kicks in, you feel betrayed.  “War, Inc.” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for violence, language and brief sexual material.  WAR, INC.

If there's anything to be learned from "War, Inc.," it's about the shelf life of satire, and how parody simply can't be too plausible. A blackly comic take on the first totally outsourced war? We're too close to being in one right now, which makes this John Cusack vehicle too close for comfort. It's also so close to being funny you can just about taste it -- just about. Name cast featuring Cusack, Marisa Tomei, Ben Kingsley and Hilary Duff will mean something, but word of mouth will be poisonous. Already playing in select Toronto theaters, pic opens May 23 Stateside.
In what was obviously a project near and dear to Cusack's heart, the actor (who also co-scripted and produced) plays Hauser, the classic troubled hitman (see "Grosse Pointe Blank") who drowns his sorrows with straight shots of hot sauce. (The label of one, Napalm Girl, features a silhouette of the famous Vietnam-era photo of the girl running naked from her napalmed village. So we're not exactly talking Noel Coward here.)
Hauser has been assigned by the former U.S. vice president (Dan Aykoryd, who plays one of his two scenes from a toilet) to kill Omar Sharif (Lyubomir Neikov), oil minister of the fictional Turaqistan, where the ex-VP's company, Tamerlane, has been fighting insurgents. Governments aren't really involved, just corporations -- and hired assassins.
The names are among the funnier things in the film. Hilary Duff plays Yonica Babyyeah, an insufferably spoiled Turaqistani pop star; Marisa Tomei is lefty reporter Natalie Hegalhuzen (an obvious spoof of Katrina vanden Heuvel, lefty publisher of the Nation). Aykroyd is so obviously Dick Cheney that any name play would be redundant. But Cusack's contact at Tamerlane HQ? Marsha Dillon (Joan Cusack), the funniest person in the entire Mideast.
In Turaqistan, Hauser goes undercover as organizer of the Brand USA Trade Show, an exercise in tackiness whose centerpiece is Yonica's wedding. Hauser keeps trying to take out Omar, with no success, and in the interim has to deal not just with Yonica's posse of wannabe gangstas, but also Turaqistani insurgents with their own agendas. Some of the more exhilarating scenes involve secret agent Cusack dispatching bad guys with guns, clubs and kung fu.
"War, Inc." feels a little bit like a '60s comedy that would have starred Alan Arkin; now, it seems too late. Of course, so would "Wag the Dog" if it came out now. But that film's timing was much better, and its jokes weren't quite as obscure, or its timing so off.
Helmer Joshua Seftel has worked almost exclusively in nonfiction prior to "War Inc." -- he made the first-rate "Taking on the Kennedys" in 1996 -- so his lack of comedic instinct is perhaps understandable. But even jokes that might have worked otherwise get swallowed up by dialogue, or simply aren't allowed the breathing room necessary to evoke a laugh.
