 In "The War Within," a Pakistani-born engineer with a Western education becomes radicalized by his arrest and brutal imprisonment. Scarred in every way, he arrives in the United States to seek some explosive revenge. As he prepares a terror attack, he bides his time in the New Jersey home of his best friend, who asks about the drastic changes in his personality: "What happened to the kid who loved Duran Duran?"  This searing, frightening film, directed by Joseph M. Castelo, never answers the question as fully as it might. Injustice leads too simply to jihad, despite the complex lead performance by Ayad Akhtar as Hassan, the victim turned villain. Although Mr. Castelo infuses the action with all the dark dread of a Darren Aronofsky film, "The War Within"  succeeds only as a thriller with some wartime overtones, rather than as a character study that thrills.  Whether Western riches soften brains is one unresolved theme in the script, which Mr. Castelo wrote with Mr. Akhtar and Tom Glynn, one of the producers. Amid the home-cooked meals and wide-eyed kids, Hassan enjoys new comforts and entertains amorous thoughts about his friend's sister. "Let's eat, be happy," his host implores him, as he notices the possible romance. "Ask her to marry you and become part of my family for good."  But Hassan has some evil to do. After his sleeper cell is raided, he begins to doubt when, if ever, the mission might resume. He also begins to doubt the resolve of the bombing mastermind, who is among the clientele at a seedy strip club called Saints and Sinners. That shadowy figure has the nerve to question Hassan's new domestic arrangement, which he had kept a secret from his fellow terrorists. "You're getting comfortable," says the mastermind. "I know about the family," he adds accusingly.  The movie will be most upsetting to Manhattanites, who will worry as the terrorist enjoys safe passage in Midtown. The mere image of a man with a bomb under his overcoat as he strides past the New Victory Theater on West 42nd Street is pretty terrifying. Seeking cover, I began doubting certain details, like the uninterrupted use of e-mail addresses after the arrest of some co-conspirators, and the fact that none of the suspects broke under interrogation.  In truth, the film is staggeringly plausible. The main drawback is that as skilled as he is at setting up scenes, Mr. Castelo doesn't respect the volatility of the elements in his hands. He deserves credit for staring hard at difficult subject matter, but "The War Within" exploits public fears when it could have taken more time to elucidate the threat.
One of the first of a presumed wave of movies that will attempt to convert our modern field of warring crusades—Muslim terrorism and Western anti-terrorist hyper-security—into mezzobrow entertainment, The War Within  follows in the introverted footsteps of Hassan (co-writer Ayad Akhtar ), a Pakistani wrongly imprisoned and tortured for terrorist affiliations. Whoever his victimizers were, they left him a dedicated suicide bomber, arriving in New York to stay with his childhood friend Sayeed (Firdous Bamji) and connect with a cell planning to blow up Grand Central Terminal .
The film's title may seem to spill the beans—will the watchful Hassan carry out his mission or renege after enjoying America and flirting with Sayeed's ravishing sister (Nandana Sen)?—but in fact, whatever inner conflict rages looks to us like moping and staring blankly out at the East River. (Time killed gazing from the beach or dock is a telltale sign of indie floundering.) Shot in DV by Lisa Rinzler, Joseph Castelo 's modest drama struggles for verisimilitude, but it wears clichés like concrete boots, down to the cycle-of-intolerance-and-violence message that we hear every day on NPR . Its low-budget conventionality makes something as risky as a two-shot rare, but the city is often richly captured. Certainly, there's little narrative urgency—that is, until the final act, when the pretense to "war" is abandoned altogether, and Bamji, already the film's most genuine presence, slaps it awake with palpable moral outrage.
