 More than a decade after Larry Clark's "Kids" scandalized the movie world with its quasi-documentary portrait of New York skateboarders and the virgins they deflower, he is still pushing buttons with his lubricious insider's view of teenage life.  A filmmaker, photographer and besotted observer of sex and death on the adolescent fringe, Mr. Clark  pointedly photographs young flesh with the  drooling concentration  of a chicken hawk. Although he might say his purpose isn't to turn viewers on but to capture the intense physical reality of adolescent experience, there is more erotic energy floating through his films than in a hundred laboriously obtained  orgasms from a pornographic loop. Watching his films can make anyone over 30 feel like a dirty old whatever.  In "Wassup Rockers," his camera caresses the wet lips and smooth torsos of a pack of Hispanic skateboarders from South Central Los Angeles as they cruise the city looking for the perfect slope. Deliberately blurring the line between fiction and documentary, this handsomely photographed film leads off with an interview with its teenage star, Jonathan Velasquez, who mumbles about his life and early sexual experiences.  Mr. Velasquez, who plays a character named Jonathan, is the prettiest and most prominently featured of the movie's untrained actors, all playing versions of themselves. As the group's seven members   travel from their ravaged graffiti-scarred neighborhood of gangbangers and drive-by shootings to Beverly Hills, the story's romantic conceit is that they are only exchanging one hell for another.  Because these lollipop angels with dirty faces are pointedly different from the adolescent nihilists Mr. Clark normally tracks, "Wassup Rockers" has an upbeat lilt; it might almost be called a comedy. As they dash down boulevards and leap over walls and fences, tossing their skateboards ahead of them, the movie recalls such antic frolics as "A Hard Day's Night;" no one stands still for long.  For all the horrors they have seen in South Central, Mr. Clark's magnificent seven are holy innocents whose passion for skateboarding and group solidarity has kept them immune to the decay and corruption around them. With their mops of hippie-length hair and tight pants, they are outsiders in their own community, taunted and menaced by their gun-toting African-American peers who carry guns inside their baggy hip-hop uniforms.  Jonathan, who idolizes the Ramones, sings lead in a punk-rock band. Kico (Francisco Pedrasa), the most endearing of the seven, when asked where he's from, guilelessly replies, "I'm from the ghetto."  Their 24-hour journey from one jungle to another and back begins when they drive a borrowed car to Beverly Hills to skate the "nine steps," a famous local challenge that involves leaping over a concrete stairway and remaining vertical upon landing. But on the way, the boys, who have neither licenses nor registration, are stopped and intimidated by a stereotypically menacing and racist Los Angeles policeman, who arrests one of them.  Undeterred, they take the bus to their destination, where they are lustfully ogled by two sleek, high-school-age babes, one of whom invites Jonathan to visit her mansion. Scary policemen,  girls with dirty minds and their arrogant, hateful boyfriends  are only the first in a series of increasingly grotesque monsters encountered by visitors whom the movie   wants to portray as incorruptible.  Chased from one fancy house to the next, they crash a party whose flamboyantly gay host, a physique photographer, follows Jonathan to the bathroom and peeks through the keyhole, then leeringly offers "career" advice. A gaunt, drunken housewife drags Kico into a hot tub for sudsy horseplay. As the boys retreat, a high-powered film director who suggests a Clint Eastwood-Charlton Heston hybrid pulls out a gun and casually shoots one of them.  By now there are only five of the original seven.   They are rescued from hell by a sympathetic group of Hispanic maids from the neighborhood who enlist a friend to spirit them back to South Central in his pickup truck.  However you respond to "Wassup Rockers," it is completely alive, unlike any number of teenage Hollywood movies with their stale formulas and second-hand puerility. And that's mostly to the good.  "Wassup Rockers" is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has violence, sexual situations and profanity.

After the extraordinarily daring "Ken Park," writer-director Larry Clark is in a friskier mood with "Wassup Rockers," a thoroughly winning and unexpectedly observant lark about the antics of seven Latino skateboarding pals in South-Central Los Angeles. While Clark again exhibits an ability to observe young people without judging them (although this time there's less sexual bravado and explicitness), he expands his cinema by posing his hardy band of skaters against a hostile, black-dominated setting that takes an unflinching look at racial politics between minorities. With apt marketing, pic should score young fans in urban and suburban climes when it rolls out in April.
A pre-title, split-screen intro of Jonathan (Jonathan Velasquez), talking about his pals, sets up the pic's slightly improvised manner. Sweet-faced and soft-spoken Jonathan is a leader among his buddies, all of whom wear tight black jeans and long hair after their heroes, the Ramones. Group is closely based on young men Clark bonded with at a Los Angeles skate park.
The sight of Latino kids bucking hip-hop dominance is interesting, but their total absorption in punk rock and skateboarding is sure to set off discussions about new youth lifestyle trends. Clark may be the first Anglo ilmmaker who has deliberately depicted young African-Americans as the prime adversaries of another inner-city minority group: The pic shows the Latino youths clashing with black neighbors and teens.
First half observes Jonathan and his gang. As a sign of emerging self-pride, Milton aka "Spermball" (Milton Velasquez) tells everyone to call him by his proper name. Meanwhile, Jonathan tries to get romantic with g.f. Iris (Iris Zelaya), while Rosalia (Ashley Maldonado) simply likes sex, which intimidates the dudes, especially Porky (Usvaldo Panameno).
Jonathan's best friend Kico (Francisco Pedrasa) borrows a car to drive to Beverly Hills, but after they're stopped by a cop, they ditch the car and take a bus to Beverly Hills High, where they do some wild skating on a staircase.
Soon, two horny Bev Hills students, Jade and Nikki (Laura Cellner, Jessica Steinbaum), cozy up to them. Fascinating interlude with Kico and Nikki talking honestly about each other's vastly different lives pulls this Clark film away from teen sex and toward a fresh perspective on American youth.
After a scene at Jade's house, what follows is Clark's homage to "The Swimmer," with the gang hopping fences and landing in various Beverly Hills backyards, leaving destruction in their wake.
The various parts of the story may not congeal entirely to a whole, but the film's way of balancing sheer fun, loose energy and sincere feelings makes for a completely engaging experience. Clark simply lets his kids be themselves, and draws real charm out of Velasquez and Steinbaum.
Though it contains little of the visual splendor of "Ken Park," the production is sharply assembled, with Steve Gainer's lensing, Alex Blatt's editing and a string of punk tunes setting eyes and ears to full attention.

Larry Clark 's latest finds the grizzled shock-meister in a thoughtful mode and a mellow mood. Unusually benign, Wassup Rockers  details a foray into deepest Beverly Hills , made by a septet of 14-year-old South Central skateboarders-cum–punk rock aficionados.
The movie opens with the prettiest member of this possibly invented, anti-hip-hop subculture (Jonathan Velasquez ) sitting shirtless on his bed, in double screen, rapping about his sexual experiences and as-yet-unseen friends. The credit sequence includes a totally desultory drive-by shooting, but despite this Wassup Rockers  is hardly a screed against inner-city violence. Rather, it's a kind of fairy-tale adventure.
There aren't any drugs to be seen but the movie has a mildly antic, buzzy energy. There's a musical aspect to the scenes in which the rockers skateboard en masse. Indeed, bod-caressing camerawork aside, it seems as though Uncle Larry's underlying fantasy might be a neorealist remake of A Hard Day's Night  or a goofball West Side Story. Jonathan and his posse—Kico, Spermball, Porky, Eddie, Louie, and Carlos—are good kids, amiable, high-spirited, and exceedingly photogenic. I missed the macguffin that sent them on their way to Beverly Hills, but once a friendly cop confiscates their corroded jalopy, they wind up taking a bus.
At this point, Wassup does threaten to turn tedious—too much skateboard practice and an endless, increasingly inane interaction with a racist Beverly Hills cop. But things bid to get lively in the Larry Clark way once the rockers are picked up by an appraising pair of age-appropriate local girls. There's a definite frisson as they skate past the Beverly Hills Hotel  to wind up at the white-chick palace. "You're not circumcised," one tells Jonathan. "Ooh, that looks dangerous." More culture is exchanged than bodily fluids—but try telling that to the irate white boys who show up and launch an attack on the rockers, sending them on a homeward odyssey through the backyards of Beverly Hills.
Events move from the absurd to the ridiculous. Landing in the midst of a pool party infested with pseudos, the strangers in paradise are told that they're "like the Mexican Ramones." The next house, occupied by a Beverly Hills Actor (David Livingston , squinting and grimacing like Clint Eastwood ), is altogether less welcoming, but a frighteningly avid Beverly Hills Actress (Janice Dickinson ) literally knocks herself out trying to make the boys feel at home.
The rockers take a detour up to Hollywood Boulevard to skate on the stars before returning at dawn to what one portentously calls the Ghetto. Not everybody makes it back but no matter: Spermball gets the gang to recognize his name is Milton.
