         A little girl, preoccupied and uncomprehending, sits in the prow of a boat transporting a seriously ill middle-aged man to the nearest doctor in a small Indian city. Once ashore the man dies, leaving the girl, Chuyia (Sarala), as his 8-year-old widow. Her parents, with much pain, swiftly deposit her in an ashram for widows, never to see her again. The distraught child's head is immediately shaved, and she is clad in the white cotton sari that is to be her lifelong uniform.
 
  This is the jolting beginning of "Water," Deepa Mehta's superb conclusion to her "trilogy of the elements," beginning with "Fire," which stirred controversy with its forthright depiction of passionate lesbian love, continued with "Earth," which explored the partition of India and its consequences, and now "Water," which reveals the traditional plight of widows in India.
 


         






    For all her impassioned commitment as a filmmaker, Mehta never preaches but instead tells a story of intertwining strands in a wholly compelling manner. "Water," set in the British colonial India of 1938, is as beautiful as it is harrowing, its idyllic setting beside the sacred Ganges River contrasting with the widows' oppressive existence as outcasts. The film seethes with anger over their plight yet never judges, and possesses a lyrical, poetical quality. Just like the Ganges, life goes on flowing, no matter what. Mehta sees her people in the round, entrapped and blinded by a cruel and outmoded custom dictated by ancient religious texts but sustained more often by a family's desire to relieve itself of the economic burden of supporting widows. As a result, she is able to inject considerable humor in her stunningly perceptive and beautifully structured narrative. "Water" emerges as a film of extraordinary richness and complexity.
 
  The ashram occupies a beautiful but shabby old tile-roofed adobe structure enclosing a patio — not unlike the spacious homes that once adjoined Olvera Street and the plaza. Overseeing it is the formidable Madhumati (Manorma), who has the challenge of meeting the monthly rent, as widows are forced to support themselves either as beggars or prostitutes. (The suggestion that widows would resort to prostitution to survive so offended Hindu fundamentalists that the making of "Water" was delayed for years, with Mehta forced to shoot it in Sri Lanka.)
 
  Chuyia has too much spirit to be cowed by Madhumati, and she is befriended by Kalyani (Lisa Ray), who lives apart from the other widows in a wooden tower room encircled by a porch with magnificent views of the Ganges. Chuyia receives maternal love from Shakuntala (Seema Biswas, star of the corrosive "Bandit Queen"), a lovely woman on the verge of middle age. Shakuntala ultimately proves to be the film's pivotal figure, capable of reflection and questioning the status quo even as she struggles to retain her religious faith. (The ashram widows constantly curse their fate but except for Shakuntala never question the custom that has consigned them to it.)
 
  The arrival of Chuyia at the ashram and her gradual acceptance of her situation takes the viewer into the enclosed world of the widows, but Mehta deftly shifts her focus to Kalyani, who has had a chance encounter with Narayan (John Abraham), a handsome, wealthy Brahmin law student with progressive views inspired by Mohandas K. Gandhi, whose doctrine of passive resistance would free India of British control less than a decade later. The question whether Kalyani and Narayan will have the fortitude to defy the taboo of a widow remarrying any man except for a brother of her late husband unwinds in tantalizing, increasingly suspenseful fashion.
 
  Mehta has inspired her cast to rise from one dramatic challenge to another, and her film is charged throughout with the tension between the wisdom of accepting one's lot in life and the urge to resist it. "Water" cascades shimmeringly from one inspired, often bitterly ironic and always illuminating incident to another, its ending as shattering as its beginning yet, paradoxically, striking a calmly assuring note of life's wondrous beauties and endless possibilities.
 
 'Water'

 
 MPAA rating:
 PG-13 for mature thematic material involving sexuality, and for brief drug use
 
 A Fox Searchlight Pictures release. Writer-director Deepa Mehta. Producer David Hamilton. Director of photography Giles Nuttgens. Editor Colin Monie. In Hindi with English subtitles.
 
 Running time: 1 hour, 57 minutes.   

 Set in 1938 in the twilight of colonial India, "Water" focuses on a group of women condemned by Hindu law to spend the rest of their lives in an institution, or ashram, on the banks of the Ganges because they are widows. While the devout Shakuntula (Seema Biswas) spends her days assisting a local holy man, the limpid-eyed Kalyani (Lisa Ray) — the only widow whose head has not been shaved — is forced into prostitution by the ashram's domineering housemother. Employing a sly eunuch as go-between, the housemother sells Kalyani's services to a wealthy Brahmin on the other side of the river.  The arrival of Chuyia (Sarala), a bewildered 8-year-old whose husband has just died, creates turmoil in the ashram. The child's impudence and high spirits encourage Shakuntula to question her fidelity to a religion that turns widows into penniless outcasts. Kalyani too is inspired to rebellion and begins a love affair with Narayan (the Bollywood star John Abraham), a handsome law student on fire with Gandhian idealism. But when Narayan's wealthy parents are informed of the relationship, the couple's defiance of religious and cultural taboos is an invitation to tragedy.  Written and directed by Deepa Mehta, "Water" is an exquisite film about the institutionalized oppression of an entire class of women and the way patriarchal imperatives inform religious belief. Serene on the surface yet roiling underneath, the film neatly parallels the plight of widows under Hindu fundamentalism to that of India under British colonialism. Though Gandhi and his followers are an insistent background presence, the movie is never didactic, trusting the simple rhythms of the women's lives to tell their story.  Mustering a whole spectrum of luminous blues and greens, Ms. Mehta and her cinematographer, Giles Nuttgens, paint a vibrant world of lambent light and indigo shade. The lushness and texture of the ashram's surroundings are in stark contrast to the widows' unflattering white robes, which hang from their bodies like dirty bandages; but here even images of deprivation gleam like gold. Never has the Ganges (played here by a river in Sri Lanka) looked so inviting.  Shifting between romantic melodrama and spiritual inquiry, "Water" flows with the simplicity of a fairy tale. The lovers' struggle may be the heart of the film, but Shakuntula's awakening is its soul. In the triumphant and moving final scene, her selfless act of bravery offers hope to Chuyia and India alike.  "Water" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It contains a suggestion of prostitution and some brief drug use.

Deftly balancing epic sociopolitical scope with intimate human emotions, all polished to a high technical gloss, Deepa Mehta's "Water" is a profoundly moving drama about an 8-year-old Hindu widow sent to live in an Indian ashram with other widows who, in strict adherence with Hindu texts, are condemned to the same outcast fate. Final pic in helmer's thematically linked but dramatically unrelated "Elemental Trilogy" (1996's "Fire," 1998's "Earth"), this deeply satisfying film will flow from plum opening-night slot at Toronto fest to upscale arthouse berths beginning Nov. 4 in Canada via Mongrel Media. Fox Searchlight can expect a similar welcome Stateside.
Incredibly, pic shows no signs of being the second pass at production following a 2000 shutdown in the wake of on-set riots sparked by Hindu fundamentalists who objected to the film's portrayal of child widows' being prostituted. Rather, it appears that this strife, which prompted recasting and reshooting on locations in Sri Lanka under a fake production title, has toughened Mehta's focus.
Gone is the tendency toward heart-on-the-sleeve emotions that marred both her previous trilogy entries and interim pics "Bollywood/Hollywood" and "The Republic of Love." Sentimentality is replaced here by a deep passion and calm confidence in the power inherent in this startling story (closing title card claims 2001 Indian census lists some 34 million widows).
In 1938 India, as the progressive ideas of Mahatma Gandhi are working their way across the country, young Chuyia (Sarala) is told by her distraught father that the older man to whom she's been married has died following an illness. "Do you remember getting married?" he asks her gently. "No" is the solemn reply.
The girl is promptly sent to a widows' home, but the unfamiliarity of her surroundings doesn't suppress the child's natural spunkiness and unforced charm.
She soon settles in to ashram life among the 14 other widows, all of whom are shunned by society. Their house is ruled by the huge, foul-tempered Madhumati (Manorama), who smokes pot in the evening while condemning Gandhi's policies with local pimp and hermaphrodite Gulabi (Raghuvir Yadav).
Together, Madhumati and Gulabi prostitute the beautiful young widow Kalyani (Lisa Ray), offering her to the rich Brahmins across the river; when she's not working, Kalyani prays to Krishna and shares her forbidden puppy with Chuyia. Much quieter is middle-aged Shakuntala (Seema Biswas), to whom Chuyia gravitates.
When handsome and idealistic lawyer Narayan (John Abraham) helps Chuyia corral the puppy after it escapes, an escalating romance is sparked between him and Kalyani that eventually destabilizes the dynamic in the house, with tragic consequences.
An unerringly stately pace infuses these characters with a quiet dignity that elevates the material and holds pic together across a running time that flirts with the overlong.
Cast is terrific, highlighted at either end of the generation gap by newcomer Sarala's innocent resilience and an utterly charming turn by Vidula Javalgekar as an elderly, sweets-obsessed widow known as "Auntie."
Though in the background for much of the film, Biswas becomes a force in the third act: Her climactic, frantic handing-off of Chuyia to Narayan on a train to freedom that Gandhi himself is riding on, and her final gaze back at the life to which she must return, rep pic's finest moments.
Tech credits are tops down the line, led by the shimmering blue-green palette of d.p. Giles Nuttgens, who first worked with Mehta on the final episode of "The Indiana Jones Chronicles"--where she first conceived of the story that would eventually become "Water."
Though occasionally overbearing, Mychael Danna's lush score mixes well with a half-dozen strong songs by prominent Indian composer A.R. Rahman, showcased in nicely handled montage sequences.

Production on the third and most powerful chapter of Indian filmmaker Deepa Mehta 's "Elements" trilogy was delayed for years by religious fundamentalists who staged demonstrations, torched the filmmaker's sets, and threatened her life. But she was not to be thwarted. This work of gorgeous fury, about the virtual imprisonment of millions of Hindu widows in the years before independence, transforms Mehta's feminist rage into an eloquent testament to the hunger for freedom. Her heroines, an eight-year-old widow called Chuyia (played by Sarala, a child chosen from a village in Sri Lanka ) and a beautiful woman in her twenties (Lisa Ray ), come to embody the spirit of the time (the film is set in 1938), when the great liberationist Mahatma Gandhi  was on the rise, but the old repressions were still very much in force.
