 “The Wedding Song,” a seductively fluid and tactile drama from the writer and director Karin Albou, explores love and identity through the prism of the female body and the rights of its owner.  Expanding on themes unpacked in her 2005 film, “La Petite Jérusalem,” Ms. Albou focuses on the intense friendship of two 16-year-old girls living in Nazi-occupied Tunis in 1942. Nour (Olympe Borval), a Muslim, eagerly anticipates her wedding to a handsome cousin; Myriam (Lizzie Brocheré), a French Jew, is furiously resisting her betrothal to a much older doctor whose money is needed to pay fines imposed by the Nazis.  Filmed with subtle eroticism and dreamy intimacy, the girls’ bond becomes a compelling love story that will be tested not only by personal grudges but also by anti-Jewish propaganda and inflamed animosity for the French colonists. Against a background of marching jackboots and falling bombs, the film’s women look to one another for emotional sustenance, and Ms. Albou creates a marvelously fleshy, female world in the casual nakedness of the bathhouse and the ribald humor of Nour’s engagement party.  But from henna-stained fingertips to a blood-spotted wedding sheet, the film’s images (lovingly captured by Laurent Brunet) remind us that here, female flesh is always the property of men.  “Would you like the bride prepared Oriental or European style?” Myriam’s mother asks of her daughter’s intended. His preference provokes the film’s most shocking but most emblematic scene: a peerless melding of cruelty and tenderness.
Like her appealing first feature, La petite Jérusalem  , Karin Albou 's The Wedding Song  probes the threats to an intimate bond between two Semitic women. Here, World War II steps in to test a happy friendship between Tunisian neighbors—Nour (Olympe Borval ), a devout Muslim, and Myriam (Lizzie Brocheré ), a secular Jew. The prospect of Nazi invasion, with the collusion of a French administration only too happy to refuel latent tensions between Arabs and Jews, threatens a bond already complicated by the romantic entanglement of one girl and the prospect of a forced marriage for the other. Though lovely to look at, The Wedding Song  is a little overwhelmed by its relentlessly hyper-poetic imagery—all those enormous eyes staring in fright from nocturnal shadows incongruously makes you think of crying-kitten posters. The overdetermined pressures of the big picture, with war, class, race, and religion crammed into every frame, threaten to turn each character into a historical position paper. Still, this spirited film sustains its momentum as a tale of powerless women uniting to take back control of their destinies.
