 After watching the documentary “We Live in Public,” a hyperventilated account of the rise and weird fall of the dot-com millionaire turned self-declared artist Josh Harris, you might want to run home, lower all the shades and unplug yourself from the Internet. Certainly Mr. Harris, who earned a sizable fortune from different Internet ventures only to become increasingly consumed with issues of privacy, control and surveillance — a complex of obsessions that helped him lose much of  that fortune — could have used some alone time.  Mr. Harris is now apparently living in Ethiopia,   where he runs  an outfit called African Entertainment Network and remains, as he says in the movie, far from the reach of his creditors.  In 1986 he founded Jupiter  Communications, an early Internet analysis and consulting firm. In 1994, after making a tidy profit from the sale of that company, he created  Pseudo Programs, an online television company that, because broadband was still years away, was the right idea with the wrong technology. That company filed for bankruptcy   when the dot-com bubble burst in 2000, but by then Mr. Harris was  suffering his own meltdown, at times while made up like a clown called Luvvy, named after a character on “Gilligan’s Island.”  “Gilligan’s Island” wasn’t just Mr. Harris’s favorite show when he was a child: it also turns out to have been a guidepost for his life. Yet while Gilligan and the rest of the castaways ran accidentally aground during a storm, Mr. Harris appears to have in part steered his life into the shoals through ruinously expensive follies. In the first he sealed some 100  volunteers in a bunker in Manhattan wired with cameras and outfitted with guns. He called this 1999 project “Quiet: We Live in Public,” though it was anything but. Over their month of confinement these pod people turned progressively rowdier, letting it all hang out, sometimes while weeping and screaming, for the viewing pleasure of the other inhabitants.  Mr. Harris invited Ondi Timoner, the director and writer of “We Live in Public,” to shoot the experiment, which explains the wealth of images in this movie. Some of the more disturbing ones invoke the bullying techniques of discredited self-help groups like EST. The bunker itself suggests a wired version of a model prison designed by the 18th-century British philosopher Jeremy Bentham that he called the Panopticon, which allows a guardian to watch inmates who, because of the structure’s design, can never see that they’re being observed. This constant surveillance would become an instrument of control because the prisoners, not knowing if they were being watched, would, out of uncertainty, behave as if they were. Not surprisingly, Bentham’s design has become a favorite metaphor for life in the surveillance age.  Although the men and women in “Quiet” knew they were being observed, the ubiquity of the cameras and monitors meant that their actions were part of a visual stream that blurred their individual actions, turning them into an undifferentiated mass. It’s no wonder that some of the participants Ms. Timoner later interviewed likened the experience to fascism. Mr. Harris wasn’t a fascist, of course, just a manipulator of sizable economic means whose motivations,  ethics  and sanity were all in question. He compared himself to  Warhol, an analogy some journalists ignorantly parroted, but he comes off as a rich bully who enjoyed buying other people’s time and even their tears. (In the movie’s production notes he is described as a “professional artist.”)  Mr. Harris continued his experimentation on a more intimate level with his girlfriend, Tanya Corrin, with whom he lived online  in constant view of anyone with a computer. There were cameras in the bedroom, the litter box and even the toilet bowl, a vantage point that offered viewers images that perhaps more than most revealed how Mr. Harris felt about other people. The happy couple soon soured, turning to the project’s chat room for company and later relationship solace. As she does with the “Quiet”  project, Ms. Timoner weaves in chunks of this increasingly unpleasant second endeavor, weliveinpublic.com, with a cacophony of music and colorful graphics along with witnesses who, against the odds, try to wring sense from Mr. Harris’s mess.  Ms. Timoner questions his mental health, but she doesn’t seriously engage with the issues her documentary raises, including whether the right to privacy will survive given how eagerly so many now surrender themselves to the camera. At one point she describes “Quiet”  as a metaphor for how Mr. Harris believed we would live in the Internet age. Later, citing the example of how online sites mine our data, she asserts: “We all willingly share this information. We enjoy the attention, the feedback, the comments.”  We do and we don’t, but she doesn’t explore the nuances. From the ample evidence, Mr. Harris’s own life in public was a bust. Ms. Timoner  sees him as a cautionary tale as well as a visionary; what I see is that, as with many things, too much “Gilligan’s Island” can be bad for you.

Flickr and Facebook have nothing on the social networking experiments of pioneering Internet guru Josh Harris, whose ingenious and unsettling exploits fall under documentarian Ondi Timoner's penetrating gaze in "We Live in Public." Like Timoner's "DIG!," this astounding new docu burrows into the thin and darkly funny spaces between artistry and vanity, isolation and community, collaboration and exploitation, sanity and madness. Although the Warhol-esque Harris may put off some viewers infuriated (or intimidated) by his immodest brilliance and borderline sadism, others will be turned on by a provocative pic that deserves an audience as expansive as MySpace.
Timoner, a bright young docu talent, seems to share the obsessive artistic methods of her eccentric subjects, including the dueling pop icons of "DIG!" "We Live in Public," edited for maximum pulse-quickening by Timoner and Josh Altman, is culled from thousands of hours of footage collected over a decade. Some of this material was originally captured by Harris, a compulsive videographer who suffered a nervous breakdown at the tail end of his own wired "Truman Show" -- the 24-hour-a-day multicam Internet broadcast of his stormy relationship with live-in g.f. Tanya Corrin.
"Public" also makes extensive, bone-chilling use of Harris' other major work: the late-1999 New York underground hotel-cum-performance space that, complete with surveillance cameras, interrogation rooms and live gun range, he operated under the name "Quiet." Officials shut it down in the first hours of the new millennium.
Timoner's portrait of the visionary Harris grounds his main theme -- that humanity will soon become a race of gadget-obsessed, agoraphobic zombies -- in the artist's own lonely, TV-saturated '60s childhood. But the viewer's sympathy for Harris often is strained by his use of friends as virtual-reality guinea pigs.
Some will feel that just desserts have come to the control-freak streaming-video innovator who squandered an $80 million fortune on bacchanalian "aphrodisiac parties" and ill-advised business decisions as the dotcom bubble burst. (Harris, aside from venturing to Sundance, has been in semi-seclusion for the better part of a decade.)
An intensely immersive, even draining film, "We Live in Public," which doubles as a short history of the Internet, is technically tops on every level -- including its volume. Much of the film is set to an ear-splitting cacophony of moody pop-rock, as befits a character as loud and abrasive as Harris.
Pic's end credits find Harris thanking fellow art-pranksters Marcel Duchamp and Ray Johnson, who might well have appreciated his prescient vision of the virtual world run amok.
Camera (DV), Timoner; editors, Josh Altman, Timoner; music, Ben Decter, Marco D'Ambrosio; associate producers, Austin Wilkin, Meagen Keane, Vasco Nunes. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (competing), Jan. 19, 2009. Running time: 91 MIN.
 


Documentarian Ondi Timoner lends her credulity and camera to swollen, damaged egos who believe themselves to be visionaries. We Live in Public  documents 10 years in the life of dot-com multimillionaire–cum–installation artist Josh Harris , a clammy-looking loaf with none of the schizo firing-synapse spark that made musician Anton Newcombe  a suitable study for her 2004 DiG! .
"One of the first great artists of the 21st century" (self-proclaimed), Harris's primary claim to fame was "Quiet," a locked-down scopophilic millennial commune, for which he footed the bill in exchange for the rights to tape and live-broadcast every intimate moment of the participants, all interwired in a web of constant mutual surveillance, presented as a model of the post-privacy online future.
Harris's canard, which Timoner echo-chambers, is to insist that the behavior of a flawed test sample—trend-susceptible extrovert extended-adolescent "artists"—observed under this unique set of circumstances has any relation to how most people use computers. (One bit of associative editing actually connects the "Stasi-type" interrogation rooms that were an element of designed dystopia in "Quiet" to keyword-sensitive advertising in e-mail browsers.)
Timoner cuts her material to fit preconceptions. In DiG! , she set up the false dichotomy of get-rich pop band (the Dandy Warhols ) vs. poor-but-authentic rockers (Newcombe's Brian Jonestown Massacre ), which opened the movie up to rock naïfs weaned on reality-TV generalities (while the superior You're Gonna Miss Me  went widely unseen). Incapable of separating bluster from inspiration, Timoner excludes any dissenting voice that might suggest BJM aren't a terribly important band (they aren't), or that Harris's "Quiet," a spasm of manic profligacy born of short-circuiting megalomania, isn't artistically significant (it isn't).
Timoner takes Harris's erratic pulse—and diagnoses society. What is disturbing is not Harris's self-absorbed insistence that his own emotional hobbling—self-protection through technology, "explained" by a raised-by-the-TV childhood—somehow reflects an overarching social-technological pattern, but, instead, Timoner's uncritical cinematic collusion. She places her subject in a cultural vacuum, ignoring the long procession of justly better-remembered precedents that render Harris's "ideas" banal. Even his ultimate self-discovery, the revelation that Ethiopians are more "real" than Los Angelenos, is another putrid cliché—which Timoner swallows with barely a flinch.
