A Woody Allen movie about a neurotic, older Jewish guy who falls for a younger, cheerier gentile girl in a New York City bubble of wealth and privileged bohemia? No, you're not in a time warp: Whatever Works  is a new project from the creator of Annie Hall  and Manhattan , 1970s classics about kvetchy/funny Semitic gentlemen and their sunny/literal-minded shiksas. Here, Larry David (master of his Curb Your Enthusiasm  domain) plays a self-absorbed griper named Boris Yellnikoff, with the emphasis on yell . Boris is a pessimist from the universe-is-expanding school of despair, a lifelong miserablist who, screwing up a decent marriage to an attractive, wealthy woman (Carolyn McCormick), can't even commit suicide quietly. After surviving his attempt, he meets a fresh-faced Southern runaway named Melody (plucky Evan Rachel Wood, a beauty comfortable playing opposite beastly characters after The Wrestler ), then grudgingly takes her in off the street and belittles her as a prelude to marriage. Don't go thinking about the filmmaker's relationship to the current Mrs. Allen, Soon-Yi Previn; this mess isn't quite that baroque. When Melody's estranged parents (Patricia Clarkson, saving the day as usual, and Ed Begley Jr.) come to fetch their daughter, they, too, get absorbed into a magical  Manhattan world of sexual Anything Goes .
The fact that Allen wrote the script in the '70s explains something about why his newest movie feels so old. But still, the guy couldn't maybe come up with some new spritz of nu ? Once again, the main character/Woody stand-in complains directly to the movie audience. Once again, a pretty young woman gives it up to a saggy homunculus. Once again, Allen occupies a hermetic notion of New York City rather than a reality. And even the novelty of casting a distinctive neurotic comedian as the lead backfires in a movie made by the president emeritus of the neurotic-comedians union. As Boris spits out stale monologues about the inconvenience of living in a world of idiots (and trots out that other old chestnut, about how most ills can be solved by watching Fred Astaire movies), Allen's passive aggression hardens into something bitter when spoken with David's aggressive aggression. Meanwhile, you can just about hear the tired director saying, ''Okay, this works. Whatever.''
More Woody Allen:  Woody Allen&#39;s 40 feature films: Owen Gleiberman ranks them from best to worst

 Stop me if you’ve heard this one: A guy walks into a meaningless universe. He sees this gorgeous blonde sitting at the bar. It’s obvious she’s never read a word of Dostoevsky, much less Kierkegaard. So he says to her, “Is it meaningless in here, or is it just me?,” and she says, “My place or yours?”  I know, I know. It’s an old joke, and I didn’t tell it quite right. But that’s just my point. With material like this — a Jewish intellectual type shrugging his shoulders, looking into the camera, spitting out fancy Latinate words as if he’d just swallowed a thesaurus,  while an eager young actress of the moment flits around looks sultry and clueless — execution is everything. So my problem with “Whatever Works,” the new movie from, duh, Woody Allen, is not that the premise, more or less summed up in the paragraph above, is a wee bit familiar. Rather, it’s that the delivery is off.  Mr. Allen’s unwavering belief in an empty cosmos made somewhat less bleak by the charms of old movies, older music and much younger women is one of the few things left we can count on. If the man ever gets religion, then we will know we’re really in trouble. In recent years his hardy epicurean pessimism, temporarily transplanted to foreign soil, has yielded a sharply turned crime drama (“Match Point”) and a snappy sex comedy (“Vicky Cristina Barcelona”). “Cassandra’s Dream” and “Scoop” weren’t terrible either.  But Mr. Allen’s imagination has returned to Manhattan after that invigorating European sojourn afflicted by an extreme case of jet lag. In spite of a few up-to-date references — to Barack Obama, red states and gay people, for instance — Mr. Allen seems to have touched down in New York at some hazy time when Zero Mostel, for whom “Whatever Works” was originally written, still ruled Broadway. Those kids, with their crazy rock ’n’ roll! Those artists, with their wacky ideas!  Those women! As is often the case they save Mr. Allen (and his on-screen surrogate) from his worst instincts, even as his treatment of them exposes just how low and lazy those instincts can be. Patricia Clarkson and Evan Rachel Wood, as a mother out of Tennessee Williams and a daughter out of “The Dukes of Hazzard,” bring not only feminine sparkle but also acting discipline to what feels, all too often, like a run-through of an unfinished play.  The scenes, shot by the excellent Harris Savides, Gus Van Sant’s longtime director of photography, have a static, blocky feel. Their deliberate pacing and the decorous rhythms of the dialogue might charitably be described as classical, given the picture’s occasional evocation of a Broadway-to-Hollywood adaptation from the 1930s. A less generous word might be sloppy, given the near-total absence of the kind of Lubitschean verve of which Mr. Allen, when he’s on his comic game, is capable.  To be sure there is a measure of vigor in Larry David’s performance in the central role of existential kvetcher, a formerly eminent physicist named Boris Yelnikoff. Mr. David does a lot of shouting and some antic gesticulating, and even throws himself out a window. But frantic action is not the same as acting, and there is barely a moment in “Whatever Works” in which Mr. David rises even to the level of credible impersonation.  Boris hectors the camera, his fellow performers and humans in general, most of whom he regards as “inchworms,” “pygmies” and other endearments, and offers the film’s title phrase as the summation of his cynical world view. But “whatever works” — by which he means, basically, do your own thing, “filch what happiness you can” in the absence of metaphysical order — could also be the slogan of pragmatism, a more optimistic philosophical disposition, and one that would deny Boris both his self-pity and his puffed-up sense of intellectual superiority.  Without which there would not be much left, and nothing for Melody (Ms. Wood) to love. She is a homeless Southern waif who follows Boris home one rainy night and, despite his loudly and repeatedly professed lack of interest in her feelings, her opinions, her long legs or her short shorts, falls in love with him. After they marry, things become a bit more complicated, what with the unpredictable nature of desire and the necessity of eking out the hour and a half between opening titles and closing credits.  Some of that time is spent in a kind of dinner-theater “Pygmalion,” with the unworldly Melody — who is at first so dim that she can’t recognize Boris’s facetiousness when he says he used to play for the Yankees — taking on her husband’s tastes and crotchets. Other subplots involve the effects of New York living on Melody’s mom, Marietta (Ms. Clarkson), and her dad, John (Ed Begley Jr.), a pair of mismatched Southern stereotypes who blow into the Big Apple from Mississippi.  The punch line turns out to be that Manhattan is an island of relative bliss in the bleak and hostile universe, but the tolerant, upbeat note on which Boris ends his ranting is as unconvincing as his habitual dyspepsia. None of it works. Or it works too hard. Whatever.  “Whatever Works” is rated PG-13  (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some naughty humor and sexual situations.

"Whatever Works," Woody Allen's prodigal return to New York, takes the disconcerting form of a disquisition on quantum physics, love and chance, ranted directly to the camera by terminally misanthropic Larry David. Though stuffed with witty one-liners and wondrously convoluted tirades, this far-fetched, deliberately artificial game of musical chairs -- in which mismatched characters encircle, attract and repel each other -- feels forced, often losing itself in excess verbiage. Still, the David/Allen hybrid makes for a fascinating beast, of interest to acolytes of both comedians, if a far cry from "Vicky Cristina Barcelona," whose B.O. haul is unlikely to be matched by this June 19 Sony Classics release.
Dusting off a script he wrote more than 30 years ago, Allen casts David as Boris Yellnikoff, a brilliant string theorist "almost nominated for the Nobel Prize." Consumed by the big picture of the universe hurtling toward its own extinction, Boris despises all mankind, apparently angry that people are too stupid to be depressed. Having abandoned his rich wife and uptown apartment by jumping out a window in a failed suicide attempt, a limping Boris survives in a dilapidated apartment near Chinatown, supporting himself by teaching chess to little kids he flagrantly insults ("Inchworm!" "Sub-mental cretin!") and hanging out with old academic pals (Michael McKean, Conleth Hill), who are amused but unconvinced by his vitriolic spewings.
Into this semi-hermetic existence stumbles Melody St. Ann Celestine (Evan Rachel Wood), a young blonde pageant queen from the Deep South, sweet as pie and dumb as dirt. While she cooks him crayfish and calms his anxiety attacks with Fred Astaire movies, Boris alternately bemoans Melody's dimwittedness and regales her eager mind with everything from the Heisenberg uncertainty principle to a "Mikado"-like list of petty crimes that should be punishable by death. Much of the pic's comedy revolves around Melody's skewed or surprisingly apt regurgitations of his teachings, and Wood handles the evolution of her improbably Daisy Mae-ish character with surprising finesse.
A year into the odd couple's union, fate comes knocking at the door (to the opening bars of Beethoven's Fifth) in the form of Melody's Bible-spouting mother Marietta (Patricia Clarkson, in typically high-drama mode), who greets the sight of her daughter's irascible, elderly, gimpy hubby by falling out of frame in a dead faint.
But hedonistic New York proves the making of Marietta -- instantly divesting her of her born-again Christian mindset, liberating her starved sexuality and validating her amateur photography. Indeed, the city is big enough to turn around even the most backward misguided soul: When Melody's gun-fetishizing dad (Ed Begley Jr.) finally arrives, he too sees the light, thus proving the pic's moral that one must grasp whatever works to bring a bit of joy into a benighted world.
Throughout "Whatever Works," there are moments of discordance, ghostly echoes of the alter-ego problem Allen has faced for years in the absence of himself as central character.
On the plus side, Allen avoids the creepy ventriloquist effect of a younger actor mouthing his words and intonations by choosing as raucously individualistic a performer as David. Boris, who turns everyday anxieties into comic angst (he periodically wakes up in cold sweats chanting Kurtz's "the horror ... the horror") reps a distinct variation on Allen's persona. Boris may be a cooler know-it-all on the surface, but his equilibrium is more easily shaken, as demonstrated by his reaction when Melody drifts toward a Viagra-free relationship with a younger prospect (Henry Cavill).
But by forcing David, a total improviser who rarely delivers scripted lines, to incant impossibly long monologues (his to-the-camera ramblings effectively self-kidded by the visible bewilderment of the other cast members), Allen the director loses sight of what works. The film lacks breathing room -- it rushes forward like a stage play with pre-planned exits and entrances, soliloquies and asides. Even the city appears to be a set, with real Chinatown locations looking like isolated backdrops and touristy glimpses of Grant's Tomb and the Statue of Liberty sardonically inserted.
Kudos to David for having collaborated with the two greatest comedy icons of the generation prior to his: Allen here and Mel Brooks on TV (the entire fourth season of "Curb Your Enthusiasm" involves David's fictional assumption of the Bialystock role in Broadway's "The Producers"). It's undeniable that David's rawer comic style jibes more felicitously with Brooks' unromantic ethos, yet oddly, in keeping with the pic's celebration of random coincidence, both the Bialystock and Boris parts were originally conceived for Zero Mostel.

Character is destiny—at least for Woody Allen 's Whatever Works . Allen's exercise in Woody Allen nostalgia opens with a snatch of Groucho Marx  singing his trademark paradoxical assertion ("Hello, I must be going") and is powered almost entirely by the presence of a single, larger-than-life, and less-than-likeable, figure.
Whatever Works  is Allen's first New York movie after five years abroad. It's his first in even longer to center on the Woody Allen character—an urban neurotic wise guy, here named Boris Yellnikoff  and brashly played (or rather, brayed) by HBO  star Larry David . Toughened and (relatively) rejuvenated by David's aggressive performance, the Allen surrogate is introduced treating his café friends to a lecture on the "God racket," which segues into a rant against the stupidity of feel-good movies. Hah!
Nothing especially new—Allen wrote this script 30 years ago and intended it for no less a force of nature than Zero Mostel . What gives the material weight is the loquacious curmudgeon's derisive half-smile. Nastier than David's character on Curb Your Enthusiasm  , Boris is a cousin to insult comedian Don Rickles  or former New York mayor Ed Koch —a smug, self-absorbed, argumentative nudnik with unshakeable faith in his listeners' stupidity and his own "huge worldview." Resplendent in T-shirt and plaid Bermuda shorts as he limp-lurches toward the camera to buttonhole the viewer, this boorish yelling-kopf writes the check for a comic masterpiece that Whatever Works  is unable to cash.
A former physics professor who gimped his leg in a ridiculous suicide attempt, Boris supports himself teaching chess to kids whom he derisively browbeats as "patzers," pint-size versions of the "mindless zombie morons" who populate the Earth. In an earlier era, he might have been the rudest of waiters in a dairy restaurant. Is there anything at all that could rock this schmuck's world? Whatever Works  shifts into gear when Boris finds a teenage runaway named Melodie (Evan Rachel Wood ) camped out in front of his anachronistically shabby downtown digs, and grudgingly takes her in.
Of course, Melodie is also a type. Woody Allen looks at her and hears America singing. She's a cheerful, optimistic, winsome Mississippi belle—Margaret Dumont  meets Daisy Mae or, as her benefactor ungraciously puts it, "a character out of Faulkner not unlike Benjy"—so apparently stupid that she doesn't get Boris's sarcasm and even develops a crush on him. They "date" (he takes her to Grant's Tomb  and Yonah Shimmel 's knishery), and, living out the Woodman's fondest fantasy, they marry.
The wonder of Melodie's character is that she manages to internalize Boris's crabby, karping worldview while maintaining her sweet and tolerant disposition. Sex aside, Yellnikoff's cronies wonder what he sees in her. "She keeps me company at the Emergency Room when I'm convinced my mosquito bite is a melanoma," he explains. It's less apparent what Melodie sees in him, until her estranged parents, Marietta  (Patricia Clarkson ) and John (Ed Begley Jr.) , arrive. Still, the introduction of these well-off, white-bread, Jesus-praising "aborigines," as their son-in-law characterizes them, serves to upstage and hence diminish Allen's antihero even as Allen's own narcissism is globalized—there's no one so primitive they won't be grateful for an introduction to Manhattan sophistication. The yokels come to New York and, casting off the shackles of their benighted upbringings, go native. It is at this point that the movie dons its jammies and goes to sleep.
Like previous Woody Allen characters, Boris is allowed to directly address the audience: "I'm the only one who sees the big picture," he explains. But what sort of perspective is there when a movie that goes out of its way to mock It's a Wonderful Life  winds up even more lazily pandering? To drown Boris's bitterness in a sickly vat of Manischewitz  is the aesthetic equivalent of depraved indifference. Whatever Works  illustrates, even as it names, Allen's artistic limitations.
To suggest, as Mark Harris  did in a recent New York  cover story, that Whatever Works  marks the end of Jewish humor as we know it is to give this blown opportunity more significance than it warrants. Allen did invent and inhabit the persona of an anxious misfit, but, as ambitious as he is, he never came close to producing a truly corrosive, antisocial comic work—an equivalent to Portnoy's Complaint , the original version of The Producers , Borat , or any number of Lenny Bruce  monologues. His problem, as Boris would surely have deduced, is a pathetic desire to be loved. He wants to make nice—it's just his nature.
Etgar Keret  is sometimes described as Israel 's Woody Allen , but this hugely popular humorist is more fanciful and morbid in his evocation of cultural schlemielery. Co-written with Keret, Tatia Rosenthal 's stop-motion animation $9.99  adds a measure of creepiness to Keret's dark whimsy. Like Jellyfish— the live-action film Keret directed with his wife, Shira Geffen , in 2007—$9.99  is an episodic affair detailing the absurd or fantastic encounters between all the lonely people.
An Israeli-Australian co-production, $9.99  is set in a city that vaguely resembles Tel Aviv , but is populated by Aussie-accented clay puppets: An aggressive beggar (voiced by Geoffrey Rush ) shoots himself and returns as a no less irascible angel; a stoner is dumped by his girlfriend and consoled by a trio of heavy-partying pixie dudes; a repo man takes up with a supermodel whose apartment includes some peculiar anthropomorphic furniture; and a little boy bonds with his ceramic piggy bank—a particularly uncanny relationship in this claymated world, not unlike the Disney -normalized notion of a mouse owning a pet dog. The movie's nominal protagonist, a terminally unemployed 28-year-old still living at home with his depressed father, discovers, first, the meaning of life in a paperback purchased for $9.99 and, second, that nobody cares.
