 There’s some nice filmmaking tucked inside “What Goes Up,” a muddle of moods and intentions. The British comic actor Steve Coogan plays Campbell Babbitt, a flailing, depressed journalist who’s sent to New Hampshire in the mid-1980s  to write an article pegged to the imminent liftoff of Christa McAuliffe, the high school teacher who was part of the Challenger space mission.  There he has close encounters with a group of adolescent outsiders mourning the death of another teacher, who happened to be one of Campbell’s old college friends. Although largely indifferent to the teenagers other than as potential story material, he does take notice of two beauties, Lucy (Hilary Duff) and Tess (Olivia Thirlby), who wear their angst as unsuccessfully as their black New Wave clothes.  As Campbell and the teenagers wander about in the moodily lighted winter (with British Columbia standing in for New England), it becomes increasingly unclear what story the first-time feature director Jonathan Glatzer is trying to tell, and whose. Based on a play he wrote with  Robert Lawson,  the movie lurches from melodramatic pathos (Campbell has a tragic back story) to broad satire (the high school is putting on an absurd space-theme musical) to unproductive end, as each new tonal shift erodes whatever narrative coherence and momentum Mr. Glatzer has managed to establish. At times he seems to be trying to say something critical about America and heroism (the cartoonish musical suggests as much); at other times he appears to be embracing the very values he previously lampooned.  Although the performances don’t stick  (Ms. Duff makes no sense in her role), the antagonism that comes to a boil between Campbell and Tess gives the film some bristling tension. Mr. Coogan doesn’t seem altogether comfortable with his part, which, like the story, undergoes a number of unconvincing changes. And it’s painful to watch him try to feign interest in Ms. Duff, miscast as a misfit object of desire. (Ms. Thirlby, meanwhile, assumes that unscripted role by virtue of her smoky eyes and glower.) Yet even when Mr. Coogan  can’t  make his scenes work, his prickly  presence keeps you watching, as does the eerie scenes of winter that Mr. Glatzer captures with the camera.  “What Goes Up” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Adults and teenagers talking like adults and teenagers.

As if journalism hasn't suffered enough of late, along comes "What Goes Up," a pointless and pretentious drama that -- given its title and direct linkage to the 1986 Challenger shuttle disaster -- nearly adds tasteless to its unflattering hat trick. In his feature debut, co-writer/director/producer/editor Jonathan Glatzer makes one unfortunate choice after another, taking a story that desperately wants to resonate as "important" and rendering it merely irritating. The cast's bold-faced names -- Steve Coogan, Hilary Duff, "Juno's" Olivia Thirlby -- seem unlikely to prevent a rough landing.
Glatzer (who wrote the screenplay with Robert Lawson, liberally adapted from the latter's play) states in the press notes that his goal was to "put heroism in America under the microscope," but what's onscreen proves far too disjointed to coherently make that clear.
Best known Stateside for comedy ("Tropic Thunder," "Hamlet 2"), Coogan plays Campbell Babbitt, a reporter who -- after having an affair with an interview subject -- has covered up her suicide and proceeded to write a series of uplifting pieces about her. Babbitt's Jayson Blair-like turn has gone undetected, but his boss dispatches him to write about Christa McAuliffe, the New Hampshire educator chosen to become the first teacher in space, who tragically died along with the entire crew.
Once at the school, Babbitt exhibits little appetite for this human-interest story and tries to look up another teacher who's an old college acquaintance. Alas, he's also apparently committed suicide, leaving behind a crestfallen group of teenage misfits with whom he appeared to share rather unsavory bonds.
The group includes the flirtatious Lucy (Duff, in what amounts to a near-adult role) and the brooding Tess (Thirlby). With Lucy leading the way and Tess disapproving, the kids are strangely intent on drafting the reporter to assume the place of their late teacher, whom they describe with cult-like reverence, calling him "almost a priest."
What transpires thereafter is too awkwardly constructed to be disturbing, but the teens verge on seeming sexually predatory. The truly crippling miscalculation, though, is using the slow-building hoopla toward the Challenger launch as a backdrop, including a school musical revue assembled by another hapless teacher (a wasted Molly Shannon). Then again, the songs, grainy TV footage of Ronald Reagan and a scene in which Babbitt bangs out prose on a typewriter (newsflash: We actually had computers by the mid-'80s) provide constant reminders of the era, as if the Challenger tie-in wasn't enough.
Beyond showcasing a darker streak, Coogan can't find any logic in his character, who is ostensibly grappling with a moral dilemma about his earlier deception. The kids are mostly OK but at times behave as if they parachuted in from a Stanley Kubrick film, only without Kubrick to guide them.
As for Duff, the one-time "Lizzie McGuire" star looks winsome, but her alter ego is aptly described as "a very confused girl."
That she is, in a very confused movie.

Shed a tear, if you will, for Hilary Duff . Having finished her stint as Lizzie McGuire  five years ago, she's too old for the Disney Channel  factory and can't compete with shinier, newer models like the Jonas Brothers  and Miley Cyrus . But this is rock bottom: I've seen a lot of terrible movies in the line of duty, but What Goes Up  might be the only genuinely unreleasable one. Co-writer/director Jonathan Glatzer makes dark allusions in the press kit to losing much of his budget and shooting time just a few weeks before starting. I feel for him. But the result is that a movie starring  Hilary Duff is nearly as cubist as, say, Alain Resnais 's Muriel—and almost as hard to follow. I think this was supposed to be a standard-issue Sundance comedy, but I have no idea what's going on. Suffice it to say that Steve Coogan  is a cynical reporter who comes to a small town and starts lusting after teen girls and tries to get into Hilary Duff's pants in a parody of the Romeo & Juliet balcony scene, and is redeemed. Or something.
