 For some of the parents interviewed in Rob VanAlkemade’s fast and funny documentary “What Would Jesus Buy?” the answer to the question posed by the title is simple: whatever gadget of the moment their spoiled-rotten kids are craving.  According to the film’s subject, Reverend Billy,  the charismatic bleached-blond performance artist and mock evangelist whose real name is Bill Talen, this is part of a larger problem. His get-up may be for show, but his activism is the real deal, and his mission is to fight what he calls the “shopocalypse,” the buying frenzy Americans indulge in every holiday season.  The film takes us on a 2005 cross-country tour with  Reverend Billy;  Savitri D, his wife and organizer of his Church of Stop Shopping; and the church’s gospel choir. Along the way they deliver their message — that peace and love, not spending, are the true backbone of holiday spirit — through witty speeches and songs to unsuspecting patrons at assorted problem spots like Wal-Mart, the Mall of America  and Disneyland.  Reverend Billy is zany and energetic enough to hold the attention of those he’s preaching to — average to extreme shoppers, many clueless as to what globalization means — long enough for them to consider his crusade. At the very least, the film might make  a viewer think twice about that next purchase at the Gap.  “What Would Jesus Buy?” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for brief mild language.
Although What Would Jesus Buy?  was directed by Rob VanAlkemade, it bears the unmistakable imprimatur of its producer, Morgan Spurlock . Much like Spurlock's hit Super Size Me , this production is slick, well-paced, and tremendously entertaining. It follows a group called Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping  on a pre-Christmas tour through an endless parade of dreary Midwestern malls. According to his press bio, Reverend Billy  is "an officiant of the rites of marriage in New York City, and a lifelong lover of birds of prey." More to the point, he's a performance artist riffing on the persona of an evangelical minister in order to drive home to Americans just how in thrall we are to the church of consumerism. Unfortunately, WWJB  never pushes past the surface of this shtick to explore the deeper forces behind our impulse to buy. It could use more interviews with the free-trade experts and anti-sweatshop activists, and fewer shots of the Stop Shopping Gospel Choir exhorting Wal-Mart  shoppers to, well, stop shopping, no matter what they're buying and why they need it.
