 “All I want is beer and damage,” asserts Darby Crash (played by Shane West), the punk-rock flameout and frontman of the Germs, near the beginning of Rodger Grossman’s adoring biopic, “What We Do Is Secret.”  What Crash really wanted, however, was posthumous adulation, and Mr. Grossman does his best to oblige. Focusing on the five years between the singer’s banishment from high school and his heroin-assisted suicide in 1980, the filmmaker sketches a virtually parentless, Nietzsche-reading teenager who forms a band out of boredom and a desire for attention. With fraudulently acquired instruments and a complete lack of musical ability, the Germs would trash Los Angeles stages and endure heckling by other bands before recognizable chords would enter their repertory.  More amusing than tragic in its depiction of the band’s infantile behavior, “What We Do Is Secret” reveals its hero as a disaffected egotist and a magnet for needy weirdoes. Structured around imagined interviews with band members and hangers-on, the movie offers too little of Crash’s justly revered lyricism and too much of his self-mutilation and manufactured chaos.  Despite this — and a particularly ugly dental prosthesis — Mr. West succeeds in conveying the intelligence behind the desperation, exposing an intellect wholly focused on premeditated extinction. His Crash is tormented proof that sustaining a career is a lot tougher than bailing on one.  “What We Do Is Secret” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Characters shoot up, beat up and heat up.

Fleshing out an icon is never an easy task, especially when the icon's history is blurry and poorly curated. L.A.'s first punk "star" was one Darby Crash -- songwriter, junkie and leader of the Germs, a late '70s band that recorded a single album and never toured, yet in hindsight was the first SoCal punk band to matter. Actor Shane West and writer-director Rodger Grossman have a clear, unwavering perspective on Crash that should entice curiosity seekers and old punks to "What We Do Is Secret," a highly personal take on the ins and outs of creating and maintaining a band.
While the five years between Crash's high school expulsion and his fatal overdose the night before John Lennon's murder frame the pic, emphasis is squarely on the singer's creation of a persona for himself and his band. Crash (born Jan Paul Beahm) gives his friends new names -- Pat Smear, Lorna Doom and so on -- and regardless of their inability to play an instrument, puts them in his band. A troubled poet with no parental guidance or love, Crash is the intelligent unpopular kid writing rules for all the other unpopular kids; it provides him with his idea of unconditional love.
In a striking performance from Bijou Phillips as Doom and refreshingly supportive takes from Rick Gonzalez as Smear and Ashton Holmes as Crash's confidant Rob Henley, the idea of band-as-family -- and Crash as benevolent patriarch -- is reinforced throughout "Secret." Phillips' Doom lights up in a unique way whenever she's in Crash's company or simply talking about him; Gonzalez gets the warm-and-fuzzies when things are going right with the Germs, then turns disdainful when adversity sets in.
In his long-gestating feature debut, Grossman uses Crash's well-documented love of wordiness as a subtle foundation, finding several places to insert Crash reading his lyrics and writings, and capturing Crash in interview situations in which he defies the notion of punks as monosyllabic ne'er-do-wells. Pic opens in black-and-white, with Crash expounding on his theory of how everything works in a circle and the Germs are his "circle one." The Germs' songs, too, are extended lyrical workouts, and without saying so, pic makes clear that Crash was a poet of distinction, a man whose style was significantly distanced from the best bands of New York (Ramones, Talking Heads) and England (the Clash, Sex Pistols).
In December 1975, when "Secret" opens, Crash has begun to apply David Bowie's song "Five Years" as a mantra for his "plan." Grossman creates an insular world for the Germs that enhances the tension between audience and band in several performance sequences he uses as jumping-off points for personal moments -- the self-examination following their horrid first gig in April 1977; a sexual-identity question later that year; a Halloween 1978 perf putting Crash at a crossroads with friends, bandmates and heroin, and a post-Germs show that bores the audience to tears yet alerts Crash to his station in life, friendless save for a lost drunk pal, the camaraderie born of triumph lost.
Quietly yet expertly, Grossman captures the end of the Germs -- and it could be any band for that matter -- in a parking lot behind a concert venue. Amid the goodbyes, there are different agendas: Smear is tired and wants to get on with the banality of life; Doom has been scarred by fast living; Bolles, however, can't imagine life without the band. And Crash has no new circle to draw, no second five-year plan, no more fabricated family. And as his bandmates drift away, West paints Crash as single-minded: How do I end this?
"What We Do is Secret" is the work of several people, among them the real Pat Smear (who taught the actors to re-create the Germs' performances), with great memories -- they make sure that the fashions, the club and apartment interiors, along with the postures of the onlookers, feel remarkably dead-on.

Secret? Not anymore it ain't. In my day, you had to visit a dozen Blockbusters to find a ratty copy of The Decline of Western Civilization —now, the story of Darby Crash  and the Germs has been pruned into the same formulaic Great Man narrative you'd expect to see applied to, say, Babe Ruth .
Combining the stereotyped feeling of a hundred indie coming-out dramas with an insight into intra-band politics worthy of a VH1  pundit, the long-rumored Secret —apparently at one point, David Arquette  was attached to play Crash and Larry Clark  to direct—is the product of first-time writer/director Rodger Grossman, who says he worked on this project for over 10 years. His version of the Germs' story sounds almost verbatim like the far superior 2002 oral history Lexicon Devil: The Fast Times and Short Life of Darby Crash and the Germs  (AK Press ) by Adam Parfrey , Brendan Mullen  (booker of legendary venue the Masque and depicted in the film by Ray Park), and ex-Germ Don Bolles ; Secret 's script could've been (clumsily) distilled from a highlighted copy. In a Swindle  magazine piece, Grossman claims to have collaborated on the book, but he's conspicuously absent from Lexicon Devil  's acknowledgments, and the book gets no screenplay credit in his movie. Also, Mullen had apparently been on board for the film, but per the Los Angeles Times , he and Grossman "part[ed] company when they differed over the project's direction."
Likely Mullen smelled the inevitable. As Crash, Shane West , whose "interview" monologues convey zilch of the frontman's prophetic cult-of-personality stature, is at least a physically credible puzzled panther onstage—a fact appreciated by the surviving Germs, who actually borrowed the actor to "play" Crash (who killed himself in 1980) through their first actual tour. As bassist Lorna Doom , Bijou Phillips  looks cute in punky threads. End merits.
Lexicon Devil  gave readers a sense not only of Crash, but of the center-will-not-hold '70s L.A. that he grab-bagged his persona out of (one of the stranger-than-fiction passages, his laissez-faire education at a Scientology -tinged "Innovative Program School," is completely glossed over in the movie). What We Do Is Secret  is totally hermetic: With a crack crew of set dressers, the entire thing could've been shot in a studio apartment. The London of Crash's fashion-finding trip is identified by putting West in a red UK telephone box.
The worst kind of bastard adaptation, Secret  subtracts without adding. Characters recite Crash's lyrics with scriptural reverence, but with no other clues, we'll have to trust the readers' proclamations of his "genius." What's not  on-screen is the covert thrill of teenage self-invention, with all its lures and traps, promised by the title (from a Germs tune). That's what kept the Germs armbands circulating on a generation of weird kids, despite media indifference and cultural amnesia—and much of the reason that Darby Crash's story bears telling.
