
Horror movies have so many useful life lessons to share. Having sex at summer camp will get you killed (''Friday the 13th"). Dozing off in class or at home will get you killed (''A Nightmare on Elm Street"). Going anywhere near Neve Campbell will get you killed (''Scream," ''Scream 2," ''Scream 3"). In ''When a Stranger Calls," not having the right calling plan could get you killed. Even by the lowest standards, this is a frightless, cynically made movie. But its heroine's circumstances would make for a nifty ad for any cellular telephone company.
Jill Johnson (Camilla Belle) listened to her boyfriend prattle on about how he didn't mean to kiss one of Jill's best friends. He's really sorry -- like 800-minutes-over-the-monthly-limit sorry. But it's Jill who's grounded and must repay her folks for the cellphone bill. So she takes a baby-sitting gig at an outrageously over-architected house on a lake. While the kids sleep, someone keeps ringing the phone and hanging up. Sometimes the caller will ask Jill, ''Have you checked the children?" She calls the police, but she's on her own to creep very slowly down long corridors and around every corner, until she's backed into an anticlimactic cardio-based showdown.
''When a Stranger Calls," which was not screened for critics, is allegedly a remake of the 1979 chiller of the same name. Really, it's an extended-play remix of the older movie's first 20 minutes in which a prank caller made a young Carole Kane crawl out of her skin. That movie had a classic, elegant composition. For the most part, the camera remained still. The editing was crisp and deliberate, insinuating terror in a way that occasionally tingled the spine. It wasn't great, but it worked. This update, directed by Simon West (''Tomb Raider") and written by first-timer Jake Wade Wall, is radically revised hackwork. There's enough dead space to give an audience plenty of time to revolt.
It's also impossible to sit through knowing the opening scene of ''Scream" already tweaked the original ''Stranger" so brilliantly. This new version lops off the remaining 70 minutes of the '79 film, in which Charles Durning and the steely Colleen Dewhurst confront the film's escaped nutjob. West and Wall don't bother with any surprises. Instead, they cough up a garden-variety boogeyman, then put Belle on a chase-movie treadmill while she protects her two blathering charges. The whole thing ends with a whimper (not to mention the absurd promise of a sequel). Audiences are bound to exit ''Stranger" booing, knowing full well the movie belongs on their do-not-call list.



A modestly clever concept gets indifferent execution in "When a Stranger Calls," another bigger-yet-blander remake of an allegedly "classic" '70s shocker. Unleashed without press previews for a Super Bowl weekend opening frame, pic might scare up some small change by appealing to ticket buyers in the same demographic as its feisty teen heroine. But it's more likely that this "Stranger" won't get acquainted with a wider aud until it is reintroduced in homevid format.
Original 1979 thriller achieved semi-cult status with an ingeniously nasty first act that has inspired countless imitations -- and quite a few spot-on parodies. (Did somebody say "Scream"?)
In the original, babysitter Jill (Carol Kane) is rattled by phone calls from a raspy-voiced stranger who repeatedly asks: "Have you checked on the children?" Jill's fear intensifies when the calls are traced to a phone line inside the house. The '79 pic then leaps ahead a few years to set up a reunion between the phone caller, escaped from a mental hospital, and Jill, who now has her own offspring.
For the remake, scripter Jake Wade Wall shrewdly opted to jettison everything but the opening 20 or so minutes of the original pic. New "Stranger" consists almost entirely of a protracted cat-and-mouse game as an appreciably more formidable but equally terrified Jill (Camilla Belle) is mercilessly stalked and taunted by an apparently omniscient phone caller (played by Tommy Flanagan, voiced by Lance Henriksen) during her long, dark night of babysitting in a secluded, spectacularly opulent home.
After setting up this promising premise, however, Wall and helmer Simon West ("Laura Croft: Tomb Raider") fail to sustain suspense -- or even consistently maintain interest -- during what amounts to 70 or so minutes of fake-outs, pregnant pauses and, occasionally, cheap shocks. (Tacked-on coda, which owes more than it can repay to Brian De Palma's "Carrie" and several copycats, is bound to generate derisive laughter.)
Early scenes subtly establish an undeniably unsettling mood, as Jill reacts to the ineffably threatening sounds of commonplace household items (motion-triggered lights, an automatic icemaker, etc.) while, outside, winds howl and tree branches rustle. A little of this goes a long way, however.
It doesn't help that the plot mechanics creak much too loudly, and the shameless contrivances are all too obvious. In addition, sequel goes through elaborate contortions to make sure this Jill doesn't benefit from cell phone technology that original pic's heroine didn't have. This leads to one truly amusing plot wrinkle: Jill is forced to baby-sit as punishment for using too many minutes on her family's cell phone account.
Belle earns props for performing gracefully and compellingly under the pressure of being the only person on screen for long stretches of running time. However, supporting players, including Katie Cassidy as a bitchy classmate, are mostly unremarkable.
Production designer Jon Gary Steele merits his own kudos for creating what gradually emerges as Belle's most prominent co-star: An enormous and ultra-modern three-story house tricked out with glass walls, dark shadows and a cavernous atrium. Set allows lenser Peter Menzies Jr. ample leeway to employ an impressive variety of visual stratagems to enhance pic's wall-to-wall paranoia. Although, in the end, that's not quite enough.

When a Stranger Calls  remakes just the first 15 minutes of the 1979 film of the same name, jettisoning its main story (of an obsessed private eye hunting a serial killer) while expanding the opening, where a babysitter is harassed by threatening phone calls, to a full 90 minutes. Not surprisingly, then, this version is a thin, protracted study in shifting Hollywood  strategies. The original, while dramatically spotty, was an almost experimental concoction of horror and thriller. The 2006 model, in contrast, is straight-up formula. Given very little to work with, director Simon West  relies on James Dooley 's persistent, oppressive score to keep viewers unsettled, but there is a limit to how many times mundane activities can be rendered spooky by wailing string instruments ("Oh my God, the refrigerator is making ice! Run for your life! "). Ultimately, the movie's too predictable to be scary. Instead of wondering where the killer will pop up next, you'll ponder why these serial murdering types always seem to wear black jumpsuits and steel-toed boots and breathe like asthmatics who just lost their medication.
