 From its opening scene, in which Antony, the blond, androgynous singer from Antony and the Johnsons performs "I Fell in Love With a Dead Boy" in a haunted, shivering half-falsetto before a rapt audience, "Wild Side" sustains a mood of extravagant alienation and melancholy. The French film, directed by Sébastien Lifshitz from a screenplay by Stéphane Bouquet, observes the world through the eyes of Stéphanie (Stéphanie Michelini), a (pre-operative) transsexual prostitute who works the streets, bars and discos of Paris.  She lives with Jamel, a 30-year-old bisexual North African hustler who has fled the dismal housing project where he grew up. Graphic scenes show them separately plying their trade with demanding customers in bleak, joyless settings.  When Stéphanie is summoned to her childhood home in northern France by her dying mother, Liliane (Josiane Storelu), after being away for 17 years, she is flooded with memories of playing games of dress-up with her sister in the fields and of being dandled by her father. In those days, she was Pierre. And as she gently spoon-feeds soup to Liliane, to whom she bears a remarkable resemblance, she confronts her mother's intractable disapproval of what she has made of her life.  Stéphanie has already met Mikhail, a dishwasher and an illegal immigrant from Russia, who falls in love with her. With Jamel, the three become a ménage à trois, clinging to one another as a sexually connected alternative family. When she visits her mother, they join her.  "Wild Side" pointedly avoids overt psychologizing to portray Stéphanie, Jamel and Mikhail as romantic outsiders, beautiful, bruised lost souls who have found tentative comfort in one another. The cinematography by Agnès Godard, the longtime collaborator of Claire Denis, achieves the same breathtaking blend of sensuality, formal elegance and surreal detail she brought to Ms. Denis's masterpiece "Beau Travail."  Whether the camera is trained on the human body, the architecture of Paris, the fields of northern France or dancers gyrating in a disco, the movie gives you the feeling of rediscovering the world, moment by moment, in a revelatory waking dream. It is a world of layered mysteries, primitive and seething with latent violence, but exquisitely beautiful.  As a piece of storytelling, though, "Wild Side" is too elliptical and poetically structured to cohere as more than an intense mood piece with social ramifications. The movie is so enraptured with its own romantic desolation that its narrative drive becomes sidetracked.

Sex frequently disguises itself as friendship and love in "Wild Side," a morbid and self-important homosexual "Jules & Jim" for the new millennium. Mistaking silence for significance, Gallic helmer Sebastien Lifshitz lets long periods roll by without dialogue, but his intention to shock is unmistakable, with one genital close-up, one anal penetration and two acts of fellatio in the first few minutes. Gay fests are pic's obvious destination, though distribs looking for sensationalism may also be rewarded.
After the aforementioned sexual imagery, pic begins with pre-op transsexual Stephanie (Stephanie Michelini) receiving a phone call at her Paris apartment that mom is dying. She returns to her home village in northern France, taking along one of her live-in lovers, Mikhail (Edouard Nikitine), a non-Francophone Russian emigre. The other one, Jamel (Yasmine Belmadi), continues cruising railroad stations for sex with anyone who'll pay him, and then also makes the trip north. Childhood flashbacks do little to elucidate the feelings below Stephanie's stoic face and other narrative-time shuffles only disrupt the flow. Perfs are largely cold and detached; Agnes Godard's lensing is exquisite but wasted, and other tech credits are good.
Camera (color, widescreen), Agnes Godard; editor, Stephanie Mahet; music, Joceyln Pook; art director, Veronique Mellery; costume designer, Elizabeth Mehu. Reviewed at Berlin Film Festival (Panorama), Feb. 8, 2004. French, English, Russian dialogue. Running time: 94 MIN.
 


The ménage à trois drama Wild Side  takes its name from Lou Reed 's affectionate sleaze anthem and does indeed feature a transgender protagonist who never loses her head even when she's giving head. But the song that opens the film is a more fitting tone setter: "Fell in Love With a Dead Boy," a brittle lament plaintively warbled by bluesy androgyne Antony (of the Johnsons) to a rapt audience of Parisian transsexuals ("Are you a boy or a girl?"). Sébastien Lifshitz 's gender-blurring mosaic of bruised lives is an alternative-family endorsement with a premise that sounds like a barroom joke: Ever hear the one about the bisexual Russian army deserter, the Algerian rent boy, and the pre-op transsexual French hooker? There's nothing lewd about the punchline, though, which proposes a nurturing polyamorous threesome as a sustainable design for living.
Weary of walking the Paris streets, Stéphanie (Stéphanie Michelini ) returns to her deserted provincial hometown to care for her dying mother (who still calls her Pierre). She's joined there first by Mikhail (Edouard Nikitine ), an illegal immigrant she met under less than romantic circumstances, and then by her roommate Jamel (Yasmine Belmadi ), a hustler who conducts his business in the public toilets at railway stations. Stéphanie declines to choose between the two men, so it's just as well that they're attracted to each other. Taking a cue from the characters' splintered, shifting identities, the movie takes shape as a poetic assemblage of serrated fragments. Chronology is almost free-associational as Lifshitz sketches in bits of backstory, assigning equal weight to each side of the love triangle. While Jocelyn Pook 's doleful string score flirts with parodic self-seriousness, Agnès Godard 's sensuous cinematography achieves a Nan Goldin -esque immediacy, at once harsh and intimate. Like Come Undone  (2000), Lifshitz's last film to receive U.S. distribution, Wild Side  matches sexual directness with an emotional discretion. In both movies, copious ellipses and a general reticence serve largely to sidestep the sentimental clichés built into the scenarios. Still, Lifshitz successfully maneuvers his trio of outcasts toward a state of grace: His vision of misfit utopianism, in its own quiet way, is as defiant as anything in Fassbinder.
