t would have been easy for a filmmaker in search of novelty to treat the bird-fancying "St. Francis of Telegraph Hill" - as a passer-by calls the subject of Judy Irving's documentary "The Wild Parrots of Telegraph Hill" - like a sitting duck. Just aim the camera, fire and assemble the torn feathers into the portrait of a bohemian crank. That subject, Mark Bittner, is a shaggy-haired, ponytailed, redheaded, 50-ish San Franciscan who tends a flock of around four dozen wild parrots that live in his neighborhood. Mr. Bittner subsists with no visible means of support in a rent-free cottage on luxury real estate. One scene shows this affable, well-spoken man, who moved to San Francisco from Seattle more than 25 years ago to be a professional musician, accepting free food at a North Beach bakery. But in Ms. Irving's affectionate film, Mr. Bittner is more of a sage than a deadbeat. A dreamer who has spent half his life discovering his calling as an avian observer, he refuses to think of himself as an eccentric. Neither does Ms. Irving, who takes him at his word and documents his unusual life with barely the hint of a raised eyebrow. By the end of the movie,  you might even begin reconsidering your relationship with the animal kingdom and questioning the distance you put between yourself and nonhuman species. As Mr. Bittner introduces you to the noisy parrots he observes and nurtures and whose lives he chronicles in photographs and journals, he convincingly demonstrates that individual birds have distinct personalities. They also form personal attachments that may have an emotional dimension. Even as Mr. Bittner suggests this idea, he warns himself and us not to go too far in anthropomorphizing our relationships with animals. The close-ups of the blinking parrots, with their bright green backs, red or blue heads and imperious beaks, are gorgeous. We meet Mr. Bittner's favorite, Connor, a standoffish blue-crowned conure who lives among a flock made up mostly of cherry-headed conures with names like Mingus, Picasso, Sophie, Pushkin and Tupelo. Ms. Irving's camera observes the birds eating out of Mr. Bittner's hands, as well as squabbling and nuzzling among themselves and signaling the danger of hawks that circle the sky, perpetually on the lookout for prey. Rest assured that Mr. Bittner's birdland is no Disney-softened peaceable kingdom. The parrots themselves are vicious to those in their flock who are sick or injured. How did these South American species, originally from Ecuador and Peru, end up in San Francisco? In the weakest segment of the movie, assorted urban legends are trotted out as possible explanations, from escaped pets to transportation accidents. Mr. Bittner's experiences with birds have turned him into a metaphysician. Near the end of the movie, in which a real estate renovation uproots him and separates him from his flock, he relates a parable told to him by a Zen master after observing a waterfall in Yosemite National Park. When a river spills from the top of a cliff, it disperses into individual drops, which cohere back into the river once they reach the bottom. Those drops are our lives and the river something much larger: the stream of life itself.

Vet nonfiction helmer Judy Irving's "The Wild Parrots of Telegraph Hill" is a charming look at the mildly eccentric man who gained modest feature-page celebrity for his familiarity with San Francisco's tropical parrot flock. Appealing as both nature docu and character study, pic could prove a broadcast favorite, with an outside chance of limited theatrical play.
Having moved to S.F. at the end of the hippie era to become a professional musician, Mark Bittner never realized that goal. He belatedly found an alternate raison d'etre
 feeding and studying the colorful parrots -- originally abandoned or escaped pets who proved adaptable to this cooler climate -- which often roosted on his doorstep in his North Beach neighborhood. Distinguishing all 40-odd birds by markings or behavior, he gave them each names, and ingratiated himself enough to allow hand-feeding. When the landlords who've allowed him to live rent-free decide to remodel their property, he must move on. This is no small crisis, since Bittner has never held a "real" job, nor does he have any contingency plans. Aviary insights nicely interweave with somewhat poignant human ones; color lensing is excellent, instrumental score a bit 70s-retro.
Camera (color, 16mm), Irving; music, Chris Michie. Reviewed at San Francisco Film Festival, April 24, 2004. Running time: 83 MIN.
 


Calling all Derridettes: The headiest movie in the annual "Film Comment Selects" is surely The Ister , a three-hour Australian cine-essay inspired by Martin Heidegger 's 1942 lecture course on the 19th-century German poet Friedrich Hölderlin 's Danubian ode.
David Barison  and Daniel Ross 's digital-video doc travels upriver past presidential visitations (Romania ), bombed bridges (Serbia ), Stalin-era steelworks (Hungary ), Nazi concentration camps (Mauthausen ), and mock classical temples (Bavaria ) to the heart of darkness, the Black Forest cabin where Heidegger wrote Being and Time . There is evidently a German term for aquatic road movies—wasserstrasse —but The Ister  also offers a stream of consciousness. Three philosophers, including onetime bank robber Bernard Stiegler , and filmmaker Hans-Jürgen Syberberg  provide commentary on Greek myths, European history, and Heidegger's theory of agribusiness.
You may wonder if the humble DV mini-cam is the technology that enframes the river's essence. Indeed, the onrushing landscape, however despoiled, is a Bazinian counterpoint to the babbling brook of Heideggerian seinundzeitis . The movie's single Sunday-afternoon screening will be followed by a panel discussion.
