 "Why not be silent?" a filmmaker asks himself in the opening voiceover to the sublimely bleak documentary "William Eggleston in the Real World." After a few minutes of narration, that filmmaker, Michael Almereyda, establishes that being quiet is key to getting intimate with the hard-to-know pioneer of color photography. Mr. Eggleston is mostly mute while prowling for images of the Deep South's luxurious decay. But  his mutterings become clear, in this look at tattered glory.  Mr. Eggleston is now 65 and nearly three decades past his exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, which some critics reviled because of its ordinary subject matter. Throughout his celebrated career, he searched for bright but sad scenes in and around his Memphis home, when he wasn't flashing some light on the dark places. The documentary includes a slideshow of his iconic images: a dark-suited white man standing with his back to a white-jacketed African-American man; a metal chain wrapped in a tornado-like swirl around a parking-lot pole; a bare-bulb fixture on a sinfully red ceiling.  Mr. Almereyda confesses his own difficulty in putting such images and their meanings into words, and when he asks Mr. Eggleston for help, the artist declines. Instead, Mr. Eggleston allows the video camera to follow him on a shoot in Mayfield, Ky., a project commissioned by the native son Gus Van Sant. There, Mr. Eggleston takes long, careful looks at a bright chicken statue on top of a restaurant; the piñatas in a taco joint; the labels on boxes in a CVS pharmacy, where Elvis Presley is asking on the loudspeaker never to be let go.  On this trip, Mr. Eggleston has a leg wound to tend to, the origin and severity of which are unclear, except that it requires a "complicated bandage." Eventually a strip of gauze slips out of his creased pant leg and twirls down the street, evoking the plastic bag that was caught in a wind eddy and captured by the teenage videographer in "American Beauty." The documentary is entirely in tune with the grace of such rubbish, the eerie motions of a ghost world.  The still-hobbled American South is thoroughly reflected in Mr. Eggleston's work and persona. His habits match his habitat. He is crisply dressed but slyly decadent. With his grown son Winston in tow, he patiently tromps through abandoned houses and strip malls, proving he can be industrious. Then he plays creepy organ chords for languid sessions that suggest the "paralysis of will" so often applied to geniuses in repose. He is outwardly respectful to his devoted, curatorial wife, his teenage sweetheart who came from a similar background of dwindling plantation wealth. But he also allows the camera along for a late-night, boozy visit to the home of a female companion, who writhes on a couch, sucks a lollipop and delivers a soul-crushing, foreshadowing monologue.  Viewers are invited to rest with Mr. Eggleston in a haze of cigarette smoke and alcohol, to give in to "Grey  Gardens"-esque torpor. Only then does his visionary style seem best understood. He assiduously collects shards that suggest a broken past, a tormented present, a weird future. He is the obvious forefather of the digital age's explosion of oddball quotidian snapshots. He is perhaps the first "fotologger," telling a personal history with copious images that don't include him. (By Mr. Eggleston's count, he has taken 450,000 pictures and never snaps several of the same.) In a lesser-known artistic feat, he turned an early video camera on an inebriated underworld where this son of the South and dad to three was no stranger.  By now, pop culture is sorting out suburban oddity on many frontiers, and Mr. Eggleston proves the polished granddaddy who, early on, recognized beauty in a garish wasteland.  In this accomplished look at a storied career, he instructs - without words -  how to see all that is hauntingly familiar.
As evidenced in Michael Almereyda 's subtle, elegant documentary, William Eggleston  is in no hurry. When shooting, the lanky Southerner saunters gracefully through dilapidated rural structures, small-town main streets, or burnt-grass suburbs, one hand crooked at the hip as if already inspecting the finished photograph in a gallery, scoping for the right moment with a modest intensity. He's not an existential big-game hunter, looking to gun down the Now; he seeks, rather, to produce a lingering trace of his own act of perception.
"Why not be silent, patient, and watchful like a photographer?" Almereyda suggests, narrating over his own footage of Eggleston in action. On a commission from Gus Van Sant , a winter-jacketed Eggleston takes pictures of the Last Days  director's hometown, Mayfield , Kentucky. Almereyda follows, recording the photographer as he records a Mexican diner, a drugstore, and empty streets. One can't help but remember Van Sant's own disembodied video-gamic stalker-cam in such a context, but the wind bracing against the camera's mic steadily testifies to the director's presence. The sound mix is enveloping and hyper-real: A trip to a restaurant becomes an immersive bath of fluorescent-light tone and refrigerator hum.
Almereyda is present in other ways as well. In between video visits with Eggleston and his circle of family and friends, he narrates over images of Eggleston's oeuvre: perfect compositions of color depicting vernacular Americana in ways, as Almereyda says, both "recognizable and unknowable." A sequence of family photos, many shot from low angles, "could have been taken by the family dog." He glosses with the language of a philosopher-poet. Eggleston's art, he says, expresses "an unbalanced emotion poised between fear and love."
In the 1960s, Eggleston introduced color photography into an art world that still preferred monochrome: In tribute, Almereyda's movie shares Eggleston's color schemes, particularly his eye for brown earth against blue sky. Almereyda's narrated slide shows give way, eventually, to footage of a real slide show, at a museum Q&A. The video camera's autofocus resharpens with each new slide, adding an aleatory visual punctuation as the normally laconic Eggleston discusses his methods.
But much of this fascinating study depicts nothing at all, in the Warholian sense: Almereyda ushers us into long stretches of Eggleston's downtime, when he is drinking with friends or family, or just sitting around listening to music. Remarkably, these are some of the most powerful scenes in the film. In one episode, Eggleston and his friend Leigh Haizlip  hang out at her place. He sketches abstract scribble-bursts (color studies, naturally) on a notepad while she sucks a red lollipop, lounging on a couch in pajamas. As R.E.M. 's "Shiny Happy People" blares from the stereo, Haiz-lip talks about mortality. "I watched my mother die of cancer, and believe me it's not worth it," she drawls to Eggleston. "Better to shoot your fucking brains out." The two are maybe sauced, but definitely saucy, and suddenly they're starring in William Faulkner 's remake of Chelsea Girls  .
As a discourse on the art of seeing, Eggleston  structures an ongoing dialogue between photography and video (and thereby, cinema), culminating in a literal one between photographer and director in a barbecue joint. Almereyda suggests that "reality is dreamlike and photography is real" (much like the dream life feel of Almereyda's films, from Another Girl Another Planet  to Hamlet ), but the tight-lipped Eggleston's not having it. "Whatever it is about pictures, photographs," Eggleston says later, "it's just about impossible to follow up with words. They don't have anything to do with each other."
