         "Winter Passing," written and directed by playwright Adam Rapp, hinges on one of those far-out, fantastical premises that you just have to suspend disbelief for: An editor at a major publishing house offers $100,000 to the 20-year-old daughter of famous novelists for her father's letters to her recently deceased mother. Dad is a semi-sane recluse who hasn't produced a book in years, so a hundred grand sounds like a lot of money for his personal missives. Even if he could be coerced to drop in on Oprah, he'd never submit to the pre-show makeover.
 
  The daughter in question is called Reese Holden, which, as nods to J.D. Salinger go, comes pretty close to genuflection. She's played, coincidentally, by Zooey Deschanel, namesake of the youngest Glass brother and an actress herself.
 


         






    Reese is also a surly bartender with a drug and bad-boyfriend problem, and a habit of slamming her knuckles into a drawer when her self-loathing nears high tide. As she wryly reminds the editor, the last time her father submitted something to his publisher, the manuscript was "riddled with so many spelling errors his editor thought he was trying to evoke the ravings of an illiterate." To which the editor, a paragon of faith and patience not seen since the days of Max Perkins, replies, "I like to think he's working on his masterpiece."
 
  If any doubt remains that we are operating in the sphere of literary fantasy rather than observable reality, this doubt is soon handed its coat and shown the door. Reese takes the editor's offer, then the bus to Michigan's Upper Peninsula, where more references to Salinger await — though if she sees any connection between the family name and her father's erratic behavior, she doesn't let on. The once prolific Don (Ed Harris) is now living, for reasons unclear, in the garage, and pretty much drinking full time. Reese arrives to find her childhood home has been taken over by surrogate siblings. A former student of Don's named Shelly (Amelia Warner) and a man-childish former Christian rocker named Corbit (Will Ferrell), whom he found sleeping on the couch one day, now spend their days enacting scenes of family togetherness. Shelly cooks and cares for Don, and Corbit fixes the car, teaches Don to play golf (in the former master bedroom) and keeps errant Don Holden fans (Rapp plays one of them) off the premises.
 
  But any resemblance to persons living or dead is entirely coincidental — the world Rapp has created is an alternative universe where Salinger doesn't exist, but some guy named after his best-known character is living his rightful life. There's something about the movie too that feels as though it were depicting events belonging to a stage. "Winter Passing" deals chiefly in allusions and motifs — there are all sorts of threads running through it, but none of them really tie together. You get the idea that this is a sort of found family assembled from the detritus of older, broken families, but whether you're supposed to stick this realization in the basement or hang it on the wall is harder to tell.
 
  Deschanel is a charismatic actress, maybe more appealing than accomplished. And her charisma masks a certain woodenness that, here, kind of makes you want to spray for termites, just to be on the safe side. Deschanel played Ferrell's love interest in "Elf," in which her deadpan drollery was the perfect foil to his oafishness. Ferrell has long since lost the green suit but not the wide-eyed, borderline autistic innocent routine. He blurts things such as, "God is my co-pilot." And at an open mike at a local bar, he freezes up while attempting to perform the Eagles' "I Can't Tell You Why" and resorts to playing a pre-recorded version of himself playing it. Next to Harris, who couldn't be more committed to the role of the tortured, reclusive cult writer, he looks like he wandered onto the set of the wrong movie.
 
  Minor but crucial details remain murky throughout, making it hard to discern exactly what is going on. We learn early on that Reese didn't attend her mother's funeral, but this doesn't explain how she managed to remain ignorant of the cause of her death until she arrived home and read the letters. Considering that Reese's main complaint about her parents was their lack of interest in her, you would think that finding herself replaced (and her room inhabited) by a girl her own age who may be sleeping with her father might result in more than just sullen irritation. But rather than build, the tension gradually subsides. Reese and Shelly form a womanly bond, and everyone moves quietly toward reconciliation and peace.
 
  Harris, of course, is in a different league from the rest, and his depiction of the tortured writer is remarkably well-realized, considering the nonspecific yet somehow overly familiar inscrutability of the character. Despite its limitations, there's something appealing about the world Rapp has created, maybe because it's both familiar and shrouded in a dreamy bohemian idealism. A portrait of grieving artists, trying to get back to the quotidian business of suffering.
 
 'Winter Passing'

 
 MPAA rating:
 R for language, some drug use and sexuality
 
  A Yari Film Group release. Writer-director Adam Rapp. Producers P. Jennifer Dana, David Koplan. Running time: 1 hour, 38 minutes.
 
  Exclusively at the Sunset 5, 8000 Sunset Blvd., (323) 848-3500; Monica 4, 1332 2nd St., Santa Monica, (310) 394-9741; Century City 15, 10250 Santa Monica Blvd., (310) 289-4AMC; Playhouse 7, 673 E. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena, (626) 844-6500.   

 The pall of depression that hangs over "Winter Passing," the first film written and directed by the promising New York playwright Adam Rapp, never really lifts, even after its wanly upbeat ending.  This glum family drama is so scrupulously written that its information-packed screenplay suggests the major characters emerged from exhaustive outlines listing their traits and personal histories.  Although this degree of care is laudable, so many details are packed into the dialogue that "Winter Passing" often feels like a well-wrought classroom exercise hovering uncertainly between the stage and the screen. Its familiar story of an embittered child's homecoming and confrontation with a parent throws off dramatic sparks, but they never flare into a blaze.  The central character, Reese Holdin (Zooey Deschanel), is an aspiring New York stage actress and the daughter of two famous novelists who returns to the Michigan home of the reclusive, alcoholic father she hasn't seen in six years. Reese wants to retrieve a box of her parents' love letters, written in happier times, that was willed to her by her mother, who recently strangled herself with a necktie. A book editor has offered her $100,000 for their publication and advanced her the money for the bus trip.  Reese, who ekes out a living as a bartender and has a cocaine habit, carries a boulder-size chip on her shoulder. Ms. Deschanel's brave, unsympathetic performance doesn't shy away from making her a total pill. She delivers almost every line in the sullen, affectless murmur of a resentful child asking to be smacked across the face.  Those famous parents suggest a fictionalized mix-and-match stew of J. D. Salinger, Ken Kesey, Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath, with dollops of Jack Kerouac and Ernest Hemingway thrown into the pot. Reese's father, Don Holdin (Ed Harris), once a flaming neo-Marxist radical, is a literary legend whose 1960's novel "People's Park" became a modern classic. Starry-eyed admirers still show up on his doorstep toting backpacks and panting to pay their respects. Her mother wrote high-toned literary romances.  Don, who is deeply depressed and afflicted with writer's block, is a brooding, stringy-haired eccentric tended by two semipermanent houseguests. Corbit (Will Ferrell), a former guitarist in a Christian rock band, is his live-in handyman, partner in an indoor golfing ritual and human guard dog, trained to shoo away visitors. Shelly (Amelia Warner), a former student, is Don's cook, housekeeper and literary manager, who, to Reese's disgust, has become a sort of surrogate daughter.  In the movie's early scenes, the camera trails around after Reese as she ambles through Lower Manhattan being mean to people. The story begins in earnest when she arrives in Michigan and has to prove her identity to Corbit before gaining entry to the house. Switching out of comedy, Mr. Ferrell offers a credible portrayal of a musician with a pathological streak of shyness that prevents him from playing the guitar and singing at the same time. Coaxed to perform at an open mike in the local bar, he freezes and pulls out a recorded accompaniment for his own wobbly performance of the Eagles' hit "I Can't Tell You Why."  Mr. Harris may be boxed in by his clichéd role of a bourbon-swilling, burnt-out novelist who is himself suicidally inclined, but he gives it his best shot. How deep he is willing to go inside a character is revealed in a scene where Reese comes upon him weeping uncontrollably.  It isn't Mr. Harris's fault that the drama of Don's decline has so little dimension. The screenplay, for all its small details, refuses to tackle the big stuff about art, writing and Don's legendary marriage, and the movie is much the worse for this reticence.  Beyond that, isn't one clinically depressed, self-destructive writer enough for a movie? Must we have two? And must they be married? Any work of art that subscribes this wholeheartedly to the myth of the cursed artist has an obligation to come to grips with such a despairing vision.  "Winter Passing" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity and sexual situations.

Vet playwright Adam Rapp stays too close to his theater sensibilities in debut feature, "Winter Passing," exploring what happens when a sullen Gotham actor returns home to visit her washed-up novelist father. Family drama appears content to present the situation without going for anything remotely close to the emotional jugular. Result is unsatisfying and even dreary, despite some fine work from Zooey Deschanel and a becalmed Will Ferrell. Late October self-distrib opening will be suitably modest.
A member of a serious theater company in downtown New York, Reese Holden (Deschanel) seems exhausted, despite her youth, by the struggling actor life. Generally unsociable and sour, she has a fairly ridiculous-seeming b.f., who looks like a Kurt Cobain-wannabe (Dallas Roberts) and is unable to share her obviously tortured feelings with warm, supportive company member Deirdre (Deirdre O'Connell, transcendent as always). She takes pal Rob (Robert Beitzel) to bed, but it's soulless.
Stirring up this sorry condition is book editor Lori (Amy Madigan), who would dearly love to publish the love letters shared between Reese's late novelist mother and her living novelist dad Don (Ed Harris). With a cash advance, Reese ventures to her dad's Michigan home, where "Winter Passing" begins in earnest.
Strained eccentricity rules the day at the Holden household, where the shy and slightly absurd Corbit (Will Ferrell) handles domestic matters, and Don's British ex-student Shelly (Amelia Warner) oversees Don's business matters, such as they are. Reese carries chips on both shoulders, but Deschanel is a smart enough actor to restrain the script's overt characterization of a woman seething with resentment. Deschanel's eye and behavior explain the cause of Reese's well of hate long before the dialogue lays out the points.
Harris, on the other hand, is stuck with the cliched literary role of the has-been novelist whose best work (tomes about California '60s radicals) is well past, but who may have one last book ready to reveal to the world. It's an extremely circumscribed role, without the space for surprising dimensions, and the film suffers from it.
Then there's the dull, repetitive competition between Reese and Shelly, whom Reese feels has taken over her role as daughter. She also feels she was raised by two geniuses unable to give her proper attention. These elements could be the stuff of great drama, but Rapp never penetrates below the most superficial level of the various situations.
For some, Ferrell's presence will be unsuitable to such serious matters, but he wisely eschews his familiar shtick for a register he hasn't displayed before, playing a guy who's set aside his dreams to take care of another person -- but who is so painfully withdrawn that he can't get at what's bothering that person. Ferrell's Corbit may be the scenario's saddest figure.
Pic's failure to push matters to dramatic heights frustrates the good cast. A chain of fairly upbeat conclusions in the wake of the script's unrealized potential plays as false.
Title thoroughly indicates pic's visual patina, combined with a grainy texture to Terry Stacey's lensing. The material's stage origins fortunately never appear in Rapp's camera arrangements, which remain persistently bland. A contemplative note is struck by composer John Kimbrough's piano-guitar score.

First Steve Coogan , in Tristram Shandy , and now Zooey Deschanel  offer a cappella renditions of "My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean" on-screen this season, perhaps signaling a celluloid renaissance of aqueous Scottish melancholy. Otherwise, Winter Passing  is chiefly notable for reuniting musically inclined Elf  sweethearts Deschanel and Will Ferrell , whose department store bathroom duet on "Baby, It's Cold Outside" was definitive until The Power of Nightmares  permanently recontextualized the tune. Adam Rapp 's first feature casts Deschanel as Reese, a sullen and possibly disturbed East Village  actress wandering in a druggy fog of bad sex, self-harm, and forever-February malaise. After she's approached by a book editor (Amy Madigan ) who's keen to publish the letters between Reese 's novelist parents, Reese travels to her hometown in Michigan, where her reclusive widower father (Ed Harris , outdoing even his ham-tastic turn in The Hours ) has set up camp with his English ex-student (Amelia Warner ) and a childlike handyman (Ferrell) as his informal staff. The film is so grindingly predictable that I was writing out a full plot synopsis in my notebook before it was half over, though the thick grains of Terry Stacey's photography and Deschanel's understated performance add a little kick to the family-dysfunction paces, and Ferrell's dive-bar rendition of the Eagles' "I Can't Tell You Why" is positively riveting. Winter Passing  should have been a musical.
