In Swaziland, one of Africa’s smallest countries and its sole remaining absolute monarchy, the prevalence of AIDS and starvation ensures an average life expectancy of 31 years. But “Without the King,” Michael Skolnik’s subtly perceptive documentary, avoids a tone of first-world outrage; leaning more toward understanding than blame, the film examines a country forced to choose between tradition and survival. Scenes of the current ruler, King Mswati III, and his extravagant lifestyle — multiple residences, limousines, a private jet — alternate with images of life in the townships, where clusters of rickety shacks surround filthy watering holes, and dinner might be intestines pilfered from the local dump. With near-absolute power (there is a constitution, but opposition parties are banned), the king maintains an offshore bank account worth billions of dollars and chooses a 13th wife at the annual dance of topless virgins. In Swaziland it’s very good to be the king. Or perhaps not. As expected, there are mutterings against the royal family and hints of civil war. Yet the film, fluidly shot by James Adolphus, remains deeply sensitive to the complexities of a culture whose attachment to monarchy contravenes its best interests. This dilemma is gradually becoming clear to Princess Sikhanyiso, the oldest of the king’s 22 children and a student in California. Intelligent, articulate, caring and strong-willed, she could be her country’s best hope.

"Without the king," Princess Sikhanyiso solemnly proclaims, "we have no culture." The culture in question belongs to the tiny African country of Swaziland, the only absolute monarchy left on the planet, and, not coincidentally, the country with the highest rate of HIV/AIDS and the lowest life expectancy. In spite of the country's problems, however, King Mswati III, resplendent in tribal garb, hops the globe on his privately-owned, publicly-financed jet. Yet, with Swaziland providing this mother lode of material, helmer Michael Skolnik extracts only the most pedestrian of films. Opening April 25 at Gotham's Quad Cinema, "Without the King's" astounding subject-matter will have to trump its poor execution to fill B.O. coffers. 
As in his previous docu "Lockdown," ostensibly about the draconian Rockefeller drug laws but dominated by the figure and agenda of Russell Simmons, Skolnik tends to lack focus, easily waylaid by his subjects, seduced by his very access to the rich and famous or the poor and desperate.
Thus scenes with Princess Sikhanyiso (aka Pashu) formlessly go on forever, whether she is conducting an on-camera tour of one of her father's opulently appointed 14 palaces (one for each wife), bidding tearful adieus to her mother and brothers before taking off to a Christian college in California, or wandering around Hollywood Boulevard musing aloud that they could use some of this snazzy technology back in Swaziland.
The princess' candid obliviousness invites a Swazilandic remake of "Clueless," while her belated realization of social injustice possesses all the conviction of a Jane Fonda hairdo makeover being used to denote raised consciousness.
Interviews with members of banned political parties (all political parties are banned in Swaziland) seem equally shapeless, while shaky, hand-held coverage of street protests make them appear sparse and impotent rather than spontaneous. On visits to NGOs feeding the legions of children orphaned by the AIDS pandemic, docu shamelessly wallows in cheap sentimentality and mournful music.
Yet despite these limitations, "King" fascinates on many levels as it ticks off intriguing sociological facts about this impoverished nation. Life expectancy is a shocking 32 years old, while the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is 42.6% (as opposed to America's 0.6%).
King Mswati rationalizes his life of luxury and utter autocracy with an offhand cultured charm that is a marvel of double-speak.
Then there is the annual "Reed Dance" led by the Princess, wherein more than 75,000 bare-breasted girls celebrate their virginity, usually culminating with the king's choice of another wife. Not that helmer Skolnik really allows himself to "exploit" the spectacle visually.
Camera (color, DV), James Adolphus; editor, Martha Skolnik; music, Mark Kilian; sound, Toforra McKenzie, Evan Benjamin. Reviewed on DVD, New York, April 15, 2008. Running time: 84 MIN.
 



A cut above the average Quad-bound video agit-prop doc, Michael Skolnik 's Without the King  succeeds mostly through negative virtues. Instead of trotting out sanctimonious talking heads to explain exactly why Swaziland  is more fucked up than most African countries, Skolnik goes all vérité. The problem is simple: King Mswati III  uses the postcolonial bluff of "maintaining our traditions" as an excuse for not correcting anything that's wrong with his country: His response to an AIDS crisis that has resulted in nearly 43 percent of his country's citizens being infected, for example, is to call on all unmarried teen virgins to stay that way for five years. Intercutting footage of interviews with Mswati—either willfully clueless or just oblivious—and his luxurious palace life with the nation's shantytowns, where citizens scour the dumps looking for discarded intestines for dinner, creates a blunt but potent dialectic. Equally enlightening is the footage of daughter Princess Sikahnyiso getting a California college education—and admiring L.A.'s most advanced boutiques as something Swaziland should strive for. Skolnik runs out of steam halfway through, and, having made its argument, the doc settles back into the traditional pathos-laden mixture of AIDS-baby footage and wailing background vocals.
