Three friends on an outback adventure, desolate vistas, creepy music, a squirrelly truck driver . . . yes, ''Wolf Creek" is an Aussie slasher movie. Isn't that what you asked for this Christmas?
Anyway, that's what you're getting from writer-director Greg McLean, whose first feature film is at least as unnerving as it is gratuitously sadistic, skin deep, and full of plot holes the size of Ayers Rock.
Taking broad liberties with the already meaningless ''based on true events" label, ''Wolf Creek" riffs off of some of the most notorious serial-killer cases in Australia, including the grisly ''Backpacker Murders" attributed to Ivan Milat, and the scary random crimes of just-convicted mechanic Bradley John Murdoch. In those real-life episodes, unsuspecting tourists wandered into the clutches of deranged men who killed them for sport. In McLean's movie, that's really just the beginning of the indignities people endure.
To open, viewers are advised that 30,000 people are reported missing in Australia every year; 90 percent are found within a month, but some are never seen again. This text message is followed by an uneventful prelude that introduces a pair of British vacationers, Kristy (Kestie Morassi) and Liz (Cassandra Magrath), who are embarking on a 1999 road trip with a Sydney-based friend named Ben (Nathan Phillips). Their Broome-to-Cairns itinerary includes a giant meteorite crater in an area known as Wolf Creek, and if you've seen the trailers you already know something of the boogeyman that awaits there. If not, consider this a spoiler alert to stop reading in the event that you'd rather be surprised.
When our three adventurers return from a hike to find their car has died, the guy who comes to their rescue is trucker Mick (veteran talent John Jarratt), a kind of bushy-haired Crocodile Dundee on speed. He's plenty odd enough to send up a red flag or two, but ultimately the stranded friends accept a tow to his remote repair place, and the evening ends with jokes around a campfire that mostly come at Mick's expense.
Big mistake.
Liz wakes up alone in a storage room, bound and gagged, with no idea what's happened to her mates. She escapes and goes looking, which leads to a world of stomach-turning horrors inspired less by fact than by ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" and ''The Silence of the Lambs." ''Wolf Creek" isn't nearly as gory or over-the-top as many splatter films, but it's potentially more disturbing because it's so mean and menacing and common-man-size. Even toward the end, when the action gets implausible enough to seem like parody, it's still pretty harrowing to watch.
McLean's script is most notable for refraining from overdone one-liners, and his tight direction deserves credit for keeping tension and dread ever-present. But there's nothing particularly original going on in this film, and if its brutality has roots or consequences, they're certainly not on the screen.
''Wolf Creek" is ultimately all about the torture and the trauma. Happy holidays.
.

         An initially promising horror film that turns exploitive, "Wolf Creek" fails to deliver the requisite payoff considering its leisurely pace. It bears the almost always dubious label "based on true events," and details the unfortunate fate that befalls two young British women, Liz (Cassandra Magrath) and Kristy (Kestie Morassi), visiting Australia, and the local bloke, Ben (Nathan Phillips), they hook up with for a road trip across the inhospitable outback.
 
  Writer-director Greg McLean admirably attempts to breathe some life into the genre by taking his time to get to the gore, but rather than yielding interesting characters it merely deflates the suspense. The ambling first half follows the trio as they make their way to isolated Wolf Creek Crater, and though the actors are appealing enough, their characters remain ciphers. It's difficult to care one way or another whether they win the lotto, get abducted by aliens or are cut to ribbons by a homicidal Samaritan.
 


         






    *
 
 "Wolf Creek,"
 R for strong gruesome violence and for language. Running time: 1 hour, 39 minutes. Opens Sunday in general release.
 
 
   


Harrowing and unpleasant, Aussie horror pic "Wolf Creek" invites comparisons to "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" not just for content, but because both are based -- albeit faintly -- on real-life serial murder cases. Dimension Films caused a stir by buying U.S. rights, supposedly sight-unseen, for $3.5 million weeks before the pic's Sundance bow. They should have little trouble scaring up a profit on that investment, particularly if pic is sold as a more conventional genre item than it really is. Impressive first feature for writer-director-producer Greg Mclean is a more gruesome downer than giddy thrill ride, however, which could limit word-of-mouth and repeat-biz.
After too many bits of ominous explanatory text, college-aged pals Ben (Nathan Phillips), Liz (Cassandra Magrath) and Kristy (Kestie Morassi) have a last drunken night on the beach on the western coast of Australia, then take off in a cheaply bought used wagon for three-weeks' drive across the continent.
The two girls are Brit tourists, Ben a Sydney surfer. It's not spelled out how they met or how long they've known each other, but their wisecracking camaraderie is instantly appealing. It's a measure of the performers' naturalness and Mclean's sharp direction that when a mutual crush running between Liz and Ben briefly finds expression, the moment is sweet, awkward and infinitely more real than the usual horror flick hookup between cardboard hotties.
When the trio returns from a long hike to a crater in Wolf Creek National Park, they find that not only have all their watches stopped, but the car is dead. There's nothing to do but wait out the night and hope help arrives -- which, surprisingly, it does, in the form of big, back-slapping bushman Mick (vet Aussie thesp John Jarratt) and his massive truck. He diagnoses their vehicle's ills and offers to fix it for free at his camp a-ways down the road. Actually, it's a very long way down the road, making the youths nervous if still grateful. They fall asleep by the campfire as Mick pokes around the lifeless engine.
Comes the dawn, and Liz wakes to find herself bound and gagged in a small room, the others nowhere in sight. She manages to free herself, and the suspense never lets up from this point onward, with the balance of power shifting sometimes in the protags' direction -- but seldom for long -- as they fight to survive.
Like recent "Haute Tension," "Wolf Creek" is essentially a worst-case-scenario white-knuckler executed with terrifically focused skill and realism. When the gore finally arrives, after an unusually long buildup, it is not of the slasher-pic variety, but rather is more vividly painful. Narrative shows no more mercy than its villain does.
Ending leaves the door open for sequels, though it would be rather depressing to see Mick (who does sport a rather sickening cheerfulness) turn into another wisecracking Freddy Kreuger type. Actual Aussie perp the pic was very loosely inspired by, early '90s "Backpacker Killer" Ivan Milat, was sentenced to life imprisonment for seven murders in 1996.
It's hard to believe "Wolf Creek" is a first feature for both writer-director Mclean and d.p. Will Gibson, whose HD-shot color lensing mixes headlong immediacy and often stunning landscape imagery to richly atmospheric effect. All other contributions are spot-on, notably Francois Tetaz's eerie score.
Ending on a rather bleak note, and lacking the kind of false scares or other devices that normally give horror auds an occasional breather, pic is scary cinema pushed to the brink of punishment. But there's no question that what it sets out to do, it does alarmingly well.
Camera (color, HD-to-35mm), Will Gibson; editor, Jason Ballantine; music, Francois Tetaz; production designer, Robert Webb; costume designer, Nicola Dunn; sound (Dolby Digital), Pete Smith; special makeup FX, Connelly Make-Up FX Team; second unit director, Matt King; assistant director, Ric Beecroft; casting, Angela Heesom. Reviewed at Sundance Film Festival (World Cinema Dramatic Competition), Jan. 25, 2005. Running time: 95 MIN.
 


Updating the archetypal white-explorers-visiting- savage-jungle scenario and using it to express doubts about the success of modern civil society itself, Tobe Hooper 's original The Texas Chainsaw Massacre  remains a prescient touchstone for cheap genre filmmakers who, generally, have perhaps half the ideas in their heads that Hooper had during his worst JD hangover. But I'm not sure if its perenniality today is more to the point than the $86 million that Saw II  vacuumed up in six weeks this year. I'll risk a differentiation, in light of the much buzzed Aussie rip-off Wolf Creek : Hooper's film used psychopathic cruelty as a catalyst for anxiety and deranged social metaphors. Saw II  and Wolf Creek  are merely cruel. The "thrill" is simply in the sound of human suffering. Screaming.
Which is significantly less interesting to ponder while the bloodied victims fall and the boogeymen chuckle. Wolf Creek  is a no-frills TTCM  rerun, "based on a true story": Three party-hearty friends (Cassandra Magrath , Nathan Phillips , and Kestie Morassi) go on an extended backpacking journey through the outback. Half the film passes; sunsets, mountains, twangs of portent on the soundtrack. At the titular crater park, their car battery (and watches) stop working. (A magnetic field? Their flashlight works fine.) Eventually, a crusty old codger in a salvage truck (John Jarratt ) stops to help. I'm inspecting my coat pockets—gum! The blubbery bloke tows the kids back to his camp, and the methodical keening and chortling begin.
The ambitions are so paltry that our response should be too: Wolf Creek  is unimaginative, light on the grue and heavy on the faux-serious desperation. It's actually something of a Spanish Inquisition–level trial by overacting—the three leads are low-budget dull, but as the anti–Crocodile Dundee  , Jarratt is a leering, jeering, winking, colloquialism-belching horror. It's a style of acting most often seen on preschoolers' TV shows—if The Big Comfy Couch  were Australian and soaked through with cherry syrup, Jarratt would be at home.
There're no hidden agendas here—the redneck-filled hinterlands are just that— unless you count the "true story" claptrap, fessed up to in the end titles as "no one knows what happened." The new generation of teenage exploitationistes may scrounge for something joyous in this shruggable misery—why don't they just candy-stripe in an ER and get over it?
