 "Woman Is the Future of Man" was shown as part of the 2004 New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Manohla Dargis's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 8, 2004. The unrated film, in Korean with English subtitles, opens today at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.  A sense of loss permeates the wonderfully titled South Korean film "Woman Is the Future of Man," where memory, desire and raw self-interest clash against one another with startling poignancy. A story about two men and the woman they separately possessed and then each abandoned, the film was directed by Hong Sang-soo, one of the most exciting and authentically individual filmmakers to emerge on the world stage recently. Wreathed in a profound melancholy, Mr. Hong's films lyrically explore the limits of subjectivity, both its pathos and its dangers, often through different viewpoints that don't so much cancel one another out as add another tile to the mosaic of existence.  Friends from college, the two men are Hunjoon (Kim Taewoo), a film director recently returned from a sojourn in the United States, and Munho (Yoo Jitae), a university art professor. One bright winter afternoon, Hunjoon visits Munho at his home, and the men head out for a meal at a local restaurant. Awkwardness and an undercurrent of belligerence color the meal, exaggerated no doubt by the beer bottles that begin cluttering their table. When each man spots an attractive woman standing outside the restaurant, each in turn thinks back to his relationship with Sunhwa (Sung Hyunah), a painter they knew in school. After the meal, Hunjoon suggests they visit Sunhwa, who is said to be working in a nearby town, and so they head off in a taxi and into a rude awakening.  Mr. Hong has a quiet, delicate touch and what happens between Sunhwa and the men happens quietly, delicately and with enormous feeling. There are no dramatic flourishes or lofty speeches; like quite a few of Mr. Hong's film characters, the friends drink too much and flail into the night with poignant ineloquence. There is some clumsy sex (another of this filmmaker's signatures), but a melancholic lack of connection. At one point, Hunjoon shows Sunhwa photographs that he took of their old apartment. She asks why, and he says: "Because that's the place where I treated you so badly. I wanted to go back, confront the past." She doesn't really say anything in return. Unlike the men, she doesn't cling to the past, not only because it's painful, but also because she is fully in the present.  A little more happens, but not much more. (The film runs 88 minutes and has the flavor of a short story.) By the next morning, when the three wake up in a hangover fog, you at last grasp what the men's earlier memories of Sunhwa meant, in terms of how they see women in general, but also how they see themselves. Later, Munho will tell some students that his two friends "wanted to return to their past" and that, rather absurdly, he helped them get there. For Mr. Hong, whose gracefully fractured storytelling carries surprises at every turn, our memories carry little comfort. Sunhwa understands this and so finally does Hunjoon, who tries and fails to rewrite the past with those photographs he takes. And Munho? He will learn too late the folly of clinging to lies.  "Woman Is the Future of Man" is Mr. Hong in a minor key, but I urge you to see it. Some 40 years ago, when Michelangelo Antonioni was the subject of adult conversation and mainstream debate, a film like "Woman Is the Future of Man" would have slipped easily into a New York art house. Mr. Hong is not yet the equal of Mr. Antonioni, but it has become increasingly difficult to see intellectually stimulating, aesthetically bold films like this in American theaters. None of Mr. Hong's other films have secured a theatrical release here, which is yet one more reason for you to see this film. 
Slowly, we're catching up with the Korean New Wave's answer to the love child Antonioni and Hou Hsiao-hsien  never had: If Hong Sang-soo's elusive masterpiece The Power of Kangwon Province  (1998) is still cinema non grata on these shores, his grim structuralist follow-up Virgin Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors  (2000) is properly DVD'd here, and his fifth film, Woman Is the Future of Man  (2004), now catches legit screen time. Hong may experiment with story flow and import, but he's nothing if not focused on Korean twentysomethings and their untethered life path of power-boozing, disconnection, and romantic failure. For Hong's lost generation, the past never adds up to the present, and modernity is merely a fabric of unsatisfying lies.
More often than not, the men are treacherous louts—"You're all animals," Sun-hwa (Sung Hyun-ah ), the inevitable vertex of the new film's triangulated anti-ménage, morosely says at one point. And yet the men's self-immolating behavior is what's saddest in the Hong universe, thanks largely to his duplicitous manner with narrative—you can rarely grip the shape of the entire film until past the halfway marker. When you do, the tragedy of soured lives is beyond the point of no return.
In Woman , we first meet two grown school buddies as they reunite for drinks after several years; Mun-ho (Yoo Ji-tae) is a married suburbanite with a huge mortgage, while Hun-joon (Kim Tae-woo ) is returning from years at a U.S. film school. In the first of the film's patient set pieces, Hong sits the men in a noodle shop booth for almost six solid minutes, engaged in a conversation simmering with resentment and hostility. Hong then leaps backward to Sun-hwa, who is gently left behind by Hun-joon after another old boyfriend rapes her off-screen. We leap ahead again to the restaurant booth, and back again (Mun-ho pursues Sun-hwa in his friend's long absence), until the two drunken semi-friends, somewhat reluctantly, decide to visit their old girlfriend, each harboring their own secrets and each obliviously at a loss as to what Sun-hwa might want from them years after the fact.
We're accustomed to an omniscient understanding of what movie characters, particularly in dramas about love and loss, are thinking, but Hong distributes information with a saline drip. Often, of course, his two lonely fools don't quite know what they're thinking, either—Woman  can sometimes come off like an introverted Carnal Knowledge  with two Jack Nicholsons . Hong's film cuts from one flashback happy, flirty meeting between Mun-ho and Sun-hwa to a follow-up sex scene in which they can barely tolerate each other, show-jumping over months or even years and illustrating with a thwack the melancholy dissolution of sexual ardor.
The mode is icily observational (there are no close-ups), and Hong doesn't expend very much sympathy on his characters—not even Sun-hwa, now a cocktail waitress comfortable with being used. But it's a heartbreaking movie nonetheless—after they both sleep at her apartment and awake purporting to remember little, their paths diverge, and we follow Mun-ho deeper into his perpetual night of discontent, looking for love in all the wrong places, standing in the snow. The film's title, lifted from Surrealist-Communist poet Louis Aragon , may or may not be deeply ironic, but there's little doubt that the future is far off.
