 To judge by the swelling bosoms spilling out of the frame, the lingerie bill for “Women in Trouble” must have been estimable. An ensemble piece that never coheres despite a clutch of appealing actresses — notably Carla Gugino and Emmanuelle Chriqui — this movie was written and directed by Sebastian Gutierrez, whose screenplay credits include “The Big Bounce” (the remake), “Gothika” and “Snakes on a Plane.” It’s a discouraging list, true, but Ms. Gugino, an interesting actress who has yet to find a big-screen career worthy of her, seemed reason alone to take the chance. (And Robyn Hitchcock did the score.)  She wasn’t, though the fault is scarcely hers, or Mr. Hitchcock’s. Although some early flashes of color suggest that Mr. Gutierrez is headed for Almodóvar country, he soon settles into discount Robert Altman: a character mosaic with a smattering of different if fundamentally homogenous Los Angeles women yammering about love, sex, whatever. (Josh Brolin, meanwhile, tries out a British accent in one story thread while Simon Baker gives a little dignity to another.)  The amateurish production values might be pardonable if the clichés — the hard-core porn star with the soft heart, the therapist who needs to heal herself — inside the poorly lighted, badly shot images weren’t so absurd and often insulting. Mr. Gutierrez, as suggested by all the décolletage, appears to be a breast man. Too bad he didn’t set his sights higher.  “Women in Trouble” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Dirty words.

And now for something completely different: From Sebastian Gutierrez, scripter of "Gothika" and "Snakes on a Plane," comes "Women in Trouble," a wildly uneven but compulsively watchable mix of high camp and grand passions, soap opera and softcore sex. Very much in the deliriously lewd style of Pedro Almodovar -- who has co-written unproduced scripts with Gutierrez, and gets a shout-out in the closing credits -- this exuberantly uninhibited indie has the anything-goes spirit of something tossed off in a single burst of collaborative energy. Auds and critics will have mixed reactions, but theatrical and homevid potential is undeniable.
As director, Gutierrez serves his saucy scenario well, maintaining a pace that seldom decelerates from a hot trot while maneuvering through a busy patchwork of interconnected plotlines. But the candy-colored blur wouldn't count for nearly as much without the full-throttle perfs by a virtually all-femme cast, led by a gorgeously game Carla Gugino and a sexily perplexed Adrianne Palicki. 
The opening scene establishes the overall tone of stylized exaggeration while introducing Gugino as Elektra Luxx, a prolific porn superstar who's greatly shaken to discover she's pregnant; and Palicki as Holly Rocket, a rising X-rated performer with an inconvenient aversion to girl-girl action.
Pic sets these ladies off on seemingly disparate but ultimately intersecting paths, as Elektra finds herself trapped inside a malfunctioning elevator with Doris (Connie Britton), a bright neurotic with a dark past, and Holly joins her buddy Bambi (Emmanuelle Chriqui) to service an audience of one for an extra payday. Complications arise, coincidences abound -- and the cast grows exponentially larger.
Through the roundelay, Gutierrez attempts to balance comic artifice with genuine emotion, clearly intending the aud to take even his most flamboyant female characters as seriously as he does. At its frequent best, the pic suggests a Cinemax After Dark sex romp directed by Douglas Sirk, a tickle-and-tease comedy in which souls are stripped bare but women remain clad in underwear. 
There are very few characters viewers are invited to laugh at (rather than with), and, not surprisingly, the two most prominent are guys: a rakish Brit rock star (a flawless cameo by Josh Brolin) and an excitable celebrity interviewer (amusingly overplayed by Joseph Gordon-Levitt). 
Gutierrez's delicate balance has potent impact in Palicki's hilarious yet heartfelt third-act monologue about a childhood trauma. At times, however, the strain shows. It takes a lot of heavy lifting by Gugino to keep the pic from sprawling into tedious silliness as Elektra describes, at length, a bestselling product modeled after a key portion of her anatomy.
Standouts among the ensemble cast include Sarah Clarke as a therapist driven to drink by her cheating husband (Simon Baker), Marley Shelton as a starstruck flight attendant who courts disaster while joining the Mile High Club, and Isabella Gutierrez (the writer-director's daughter) as a shrewd adolescent who's more level-headed than many of the adults around her.
Reportedly filmed in 12 days by an economy-size crew on a no-frills budget, "Women in Trouble" is a slick and sexy package with a pulsating score by Robyn Hitchcock and arrestingly bright production design by Daniel Mailley. There's a kicky pop-art look to scene transitions and a refreshing snap to the script's profanely funny dialogue. 
And, like it or not, there's more to come: After the pic's world premiere at the SXSW Film Festival, Gutierrez announced he has already completed the second chapter in a planned trilogy.

With more references to vaginas than Our Bodies, Ourselves,  Sebastian Gutierrez 's Almodóvar-in-the-'80s accented comedy isn't quite the unequivocal embrace of pussy power it tries to be. Featuring a criss-crossing, virtually all-distaff cast—including Gutierrez's real-life girlfriend, Carla Gugino , as patient porn star Elektra Luxx, and kid, Isabella Gutierrez , as weirdo tween Charlotte —Women in Trouble  awkwardly mixes blue material with sob stories. Elektra and her XXX castmate, Holly Rocket (Adrianne Palicki , smartly playing a dumb blonde), who moonlights on occasion with working girl Bambi (Emmanuelle Chriqui ), provide both raunch and emotional sustenance during random encounters with other characters: Holly and Bambi dry the eyes of a betrayed therapist, while Elektra counsels a conflicted mother. Though his film is more fun—and much less insulting—than Diane English 's abominable remake of The Women , Gutierrez (who wrote the scripts for Gothika  and Snakes on a Plane ) still lapses into WE TV  hokum ("If we don't tell people how we feel, what are we doing here?") and seems wildly anxious about the delta of Venus. Josh Brolin , in bad Keith Richards  drag, suffers misfortune while orally pleasuring Marley Shelton 's flight attendant; Holly, who has the hots for Bambi, is incapable of going down without throwing up. You can't successfully deliver a vagina monologue with such a sensitive gag reflex.
