It's a fact you can pack in your _ _ _ _ (small ornamental case): Because they're sedentary adults who work in stolid silence as they chase their letters, crossword puzzle tournament contestants don't generate nearly the same dramatic excitement as young spelling bee hopefuls who burst into tears when they mess up. Patrick Creadon, who made the amiable brainiacs-are-cool documentary Wordplay , knows this, and he does what any storyteller who isn't a  _ _ _ _ (Hawaiian goose) would do to punch up the competition particulars of the 28th annual American Crossword Puzzle Tournament (ACPT), which was held in 2005 at a Marriott Hotel ballroom in Stamford, Conn.: He enlists famous people. Between timed bouts of puzzle solving (during which folks fill small boxes as fast as mind-eye-hand coordination allows), Creadon steps away and talks to the sex gods of the crossword-puzzle-addicted world about why the activity turns them on. Among the aroused: President Bill Clinton, Sen. Bob Dole, Yankee pitcher Mike Mussina, and king of most media Jon Stewart, who all speak passionately about their love of clues that go across and down.
But sexiest of all (within the species) is surely Will Shortz, the New York Times  puzzle editor and NPR ''puzzlemaster'' who has been running the ACPT since its inception. Shortz's gentle manner and French-foreign-agent mustache go a long way toward making him a thinking girl's pinup nerd — and this despite the man's pitiless insistence on making the Saturday New York Times  crossword puzzle ''tough as a  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.''

 The idea of a documentary about crossword puzzle fanciers may not immediately cause everyone's pulse to race. Those of us addicted to doing the crossword puzzles in this newspaper should find the spectacle of similar fetishists compulsively watchable. Nonaddicts may need more convincing. In "Wordplay" the director, Patrick Creadon, a veteran cameraman, employs playful strategies to keep both sets of viewers engrossed. With rapid editing style, he shuffles between crossword composers and solvers, feeding in a steady stream of entertaining cameos by notables like the comedian Jon Stewart, the New York Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina and the ever-charismatic Bill Clinton, all confessing to an inner nerd.  In one enlightening episode the crossword composer Merl Reagle shares his thought processes while putting together a new puzzle, affording an insight into the deep linguistic structures that inform this seemingly trivial hobby. Mathematicians and musicians, we are told, are best at solving crosswords quickly, being able to glimpse the underlying orthographic patterns and puns like a system of numbers or notes.  Following a mite too slavishly the successful formula of "Spellbound,"  "Wordplay" is built around the 28th annual American Crossword Puzzle Tournament, which attracts the  top competitors. The movie presents them with affection as a proudly geeky tribe of isolates, coming together each year to revel in family feeling and competitiveness. Many of the players emerge as colorfully rabid characters; others seem robotic and washed-out, obsession having the curious property of heightening some personalities, flattening others.  Will Shortz, crossword editor of The New York Times and a National Public Radio host, who has organized the tournament from its inception, comes off as a genial ringmaster, gracious if somewhat bland. The failure to bring us closer to this ostensible anchoring figure leaves a gray hole at the film's center. And the documentary lapses, at times, into an overly fawning tribute to Mr. Shortz, with a tone of excessive self-congratulation and apologetic insistence that everyone is "having fun." On the contrary: finishing crossword puzzles is a serious matter. Whatever  the documentary's flaws, the filmmakers should be saluted for giving us a rare glimpse of life in these trenches.  "Wordplay" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for some language and mild thematic elements.

Punsters, linguists and crossword puzzle fanatics everywhere couldn't ask for a more bracing tribute than helmer Patrick Creadon's buoyant and exhilaratingly brainy docu "Wordplay." Initially conceived as a profile of peerless puzzlemaker Will Shortz, the pic unveils a "Spellbound"-style gallery of competitive crossword pros, ultimately becoming a moving and eloquent valentine to the English language. IFC Films should have no trouble positioning this irresistible item as an arthouse draw with serious crossover potential.
Docu also happens to be an exceedingly warm piece of publicity for the New York Times, where Shortz has edited the daily crossword puzzle for 12 years. Celebrity subjects -- including Bill Clinton, the Indigo Girls, filmmaker Ken Burns and Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina -- all swear by the Times puzzle as the gold standard (Jon Stewart even admits that he'll do the USA Today crossword, "but I won't feel good about myself").
While the resulting work is unmistakably East Coast-centric, right down to its finale at the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament in Stamford, Conn., it's marred by neither condescension nor cultural snobbery. Creadon, who also serves as d.p., is intoxicated by the brilliance of those who construct puzzles and those who solve them, and he regards his subjects with a clear eye for both their razor-sharp wits and their endearing eccentricities.
Pic kicks off with a concise and frequently hilarious portrait of Shortz, a lifelong puzzleholic who went so far as to create his own major, "enigmatology," at Indiana U. Occupying almost as much screentime is his colleague Merl Reagle, who delivers an engrossing primer on the basic rules, goals and techniques of constructing a crossword puzzle.
Even more intriguing are the speedy and compulsive puzzle addicts who take the stage one by one -- past champ Ellen Ripstein; perennial runner-up Al Sanders; Trip Payne, who waxes passionately about the letter "Q"; and frat boy prodigy Tyler Hinman. 
Showdown at the March 2005 tournament inevitably falls short of the nail-biting suspense of "Spellbound," as there's nothing inherently thrilling about the sight of hundreds of people poring over crossword puzzles. Once the gang is whittled down to the final three, however, docu comes through with an intellectually and emotionally wrenching climax that Hollywood couldn't have scripted better.
If "Wordplay" is largely a triumph of superior content over merely serviceable form, Brian Oakes' titling and graphics design nevertheless devises ingenious visual strategies to illustrate the process of puzzle-solving, creating a play-along interactivity that audiences will find stimulating, if not intimidating.

I grew up in a Sunday Times  crossword puzzle home, my wife and I tackle it more weeks than not, and I have matured, between Sundays, into a kill-the-Thursday- puzzle-50-percent -of-the-time guy. (I'm not talking finish times with you.) But even I am doubtful that crossword solving can make a movie—or, at least, a movie that doesn't simper up to the New York Times  ' keister crack and give it a big smooch. Patrick Creadon 's doc Wordplay is whipped frosting on the subject, dallying with celebrities (Jon Stewart , Bill Clinton , Mike Mussina ) who like their numbered boxes, but mostly fellating editor Will Shortz and his cronies, who are fully capable of imparting (too few) fascinating pearls of historical trivia and also of waxing windily about the central role that crosswords play in their lives.
Bob Dole  gets off the funniest one-liner, but that's not quite a surprise once the film veers toward the 28th Annual American Crossword Puzzle Tournament and its parade of vocab geeks. What's endearing here—that ordinary, unattractive people are being treated as celebrities due exclusively to brain power—fades to gray soon enough, and it's easy to get fed up with this mob's self-congratulatory myopia. Creadon cutes things up tiresomely, but follows the cerebral action nicely via a digitally partitioned screen—clue, space, and contestant—making this a cinch for DVD rewinds. Of course, like-minded obsessives are presold, but Wordplay has no subject, finally, besides the puzzle you could be solving instead. There is no small amount of flattering the choir going on. Another doc sharing some of its cultural DNA, the spelling-bee melodrama Spellbound , had children, families, social conventions—Creadon's film has only words and people with a little time to waste.
