 “World’s Greatest Dad” shoots a poisoned arrow at the grotesque sentimentality that often attaches to the death of a teenager, in this case apparently a suicide, and the toxin leaks all over the place. After watching this extreme satire, written and directed by Bobcat Goldthwait, you may never want to attend another memorial for anyone at which tearful testimonials are read, gooey ballads sung and the memory of the deceased slathered with mawkish bromides. With a merciless acuity this nihilistic comedy ridicules collective grief and the news media’s cynical marketing of inspirational uplift after a death. Ultimately it scorns the human impulse to find a deeper meaning in any tragedy.  The film’s posthumously canonized youth, Kyle (Daryl Sabara), is the furthest thing from the shining young Apollos whose early deaths have sparked a literary subgenre since “A Separate Peace.” A pudgy, foulmouthed, bigoted, not-so-bright loser, obsessed with masturbation and the grossest pornography, Kyle has only one friend, Andrew (Evan Martin), a skinny, quivering reed of a boy with whom he occasionally does homework.  About 40 minutes into a movie that dawdles during its first half, Kyle’s father, Lance Clayton (Robin Williams), a divorced failed novelist and poetry teacher in his son’s high school, discovers Kyle dead from autoerotic asphyxiation in front of his computer. On the screen are digital pictures Kyle has surreptitiously taken of Lance’s sometime girlfriend Clarie (Alexie Gilmore), the school’s art teacher, with her legs parted under the table in the restaurant where the three recently had dinner.  Lance impulsively rearranges the scene to make it look as though Kyle deliberately hanged himself, types a lengthy, emotional suicide note on Kyle’s computer and stuffs it in his shirt pocket, then calls the police.  The escalating orgy of grief begins after Kyle’s fellow students hack the police report of his death and pass around the bogus suicide note, which is published in the school paper and reveals Kyle to have been a lonely, misunderstood genius with a poetic soul. It intensifies into a national mediathon after Lance concocts a phony journal kept by his son, titled “You Don’t Know Me.”  In “World’s Greatest Dad” the concept is everything. Cinematically the movie doesn’t amount to much. Even a cursory analysis of its plot reveals glaring holes. Its characters, many viewed with undisguised contempt, are barely sketched stereotypes. Clarie, in particular, is a vapid, chirpy narcissist who juggles Lance’s affections with those of Mike (Henry Simmons), an English teacher, who, to Lance’s silent chagrin, has his first story published in The New Yorker.  Even though he narrates the movie, Mr. Williams’s Lance remains a poker-faced enigma. Early scenes show him struggling to communicate with Kyle, who loathes his father and is ashamed to be seen with him. As far as we can see, Lance is an understanding, tolerant single parent.  The movie offers no solid clues as to why he rearranges the death scene, types the note or writes the journal. In the real world Lance’s meddling and forgery would surely be found out. The movie’s only character who detects something fishy is meek little Andrew. Everyone else is pathetically eager to wallow and to cash in on a fraud that the film is honest enough to admit changes people’s lives for the better.  In its bone-deep cynicism “World’s Greatest Dad” recalls “Being There,” whose central character, a dimwitted gardener played by Peter Sellers, ascends to becoming a national guru when his remarks are misinterpreted as profound philosophic riddles. The martyred Kyle becomes the adolescent version of that  — a sanctified contemporary Holden Caulfield of teenage angst: a boy too sensitive to live. Cynics rejoice!  “World’s Greatest Dad”  is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity and pornographic images.

After two features (1991 cult fave "Shakes the Clown" and 2006's "Sleeping Dogs Lie") that eked fair mileage from one-joke bad-taste concepts, comic turned writer-director Bobcat Goldthwait comes up with a more expansive outre comedy exercise in "World's Greatest Dad." Starring Robin Williams as the title figure -- who's somehow raised the World's Worst Teenager -- the pic wobbles a bit before emerging a successful low-key satire of literary fraud and morbid personality cults. While this won't approach Williams' major-studio average, B.O. prospects look upper-end niche.
Mom has long since left the building, leaving divorced, mild-mannered Seattle high school teacher Lance Clayton (Williams) in sole charge of their only child Kyle (Daryl Sabara). Unfortunately, Kyle has, at age 15, turned into a terrific argument for birth control; he's rude, hostile, filthy-mouthed, none-too-bright, loathed by classmates, seemingly interested in nothing but violent videogames, onanism and Internet porn even his lone friend Andrew (Evan Martin) finds disgusting.
Things aren't going so well for Lance even outside his domestic misery. His pet poetry class is near-dead from student disinterest. He's written extensively in every literary form (including five novels), all rejected by publishers. And while he's carrying on a clandestine relationship with comely art instructor Claire (Alexie Gilmore), she shows signs of transferring her affections to his fellow English teacher Mike (Henry Simmons), who is young, handsome, popular and published -- after his very first "New Yorker" submission, yet.
Around the 40-minute point tragedy strikes, resulting in the one overdrawn moment in what's otherwise perhaps Williams' best (at least largely) dramatic performance to date. His character's immediate response also strains credulity.
But once this lengthy setup has passed, Goldthwait's script turns into a surprisingly restrained, focused sendup of the blind adulation often bestowed on flawed personalities once they croak too soon. What starts as a student fad -- now they have their very own Holden Caulfield/Kurt Cobain to obsess over -- then generates national fame and the publishing interest that had previously eluded Lance. But it's success of an unbearably ironic kind.
Those who like their Robin Williams manic will have to settle for the highlight of his judiciously etched performance -- one desperate attempt to restrain guilt-induced giddiness on an Oprah-type chatshow. Support characters are rather one-dimensional but all nicely turned.
The knack for handling outrageous ideas with deadpan directorial restraint that Goldthwait suggested in prior features and TV work has evolved further here, as has his screenwriting sophistication. The erstwhile Bobcat of "Police Academy," "Hot-to-Trot" and incredibly annoying character voice might well be ready for a major-league comeback, albeit behind the camera. (He does cameo here, as does -- for reasons too complicated to explain -- '80s Top 40 fave Bruce Hornsby.)
While not particularly stylish, the production package is pro in all aspects.

Playing dark, Robin Williams  has developed the burly insecurity and gargoyle frown of damned Edward G. Robinson  in Fritz Lang 's Scarlet Street . With World's Greatest Dad , he almost has the movie to match. Lance (Williams) is an unpublished serial novelist and an unpopular poetry teacher at the same high school attended by the son, Kyle (Daryl Sabara ), he is raising alone, who incarnates every nightmare of downloaded premature debauchery, a physical virgin and Caligula  of the mind. Sabara, whose few scenes of abject irredeemability leave a lingering stain on the movie, is point man for a perfect-fit cast, with standouts including his lone, school friend, Evan Martin , and Henry Simmons  as an alpha-male teacher. The particular stew of midlife and pubescent despair that clogs a single-father male-child household has rarely been achieved so well: Lance's parental tough love is a trailed-off "Ahh . . ." The details of leftover dinosaur-themed wallpaper (unnoticed as it peels) and the dirty sneaker prints on the glove compartment are enough to convince that screenwriter-director Bobcat Goldthwait  knows his stuff. His cringer lands improbably on its feet after every reckless plot turn—involving autoerotic asphyxiation and fraudulent authorship—all the way until an over-fondness for music montage fells it in the last reel.
