 "The World" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival. Following are excerpts from Manohla Dargis's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 11, 2004. The unrated film, in Mandarin with English subtitles, opens today in Manhattan at Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.    Globalization and its discontents form the molten core of "The World," the new film from the prodigiously talented Chinese director Jia Zhangke. Set in a sprawling Disney-like entertainment park in a Beijing suburb, the film centers on a young female dancer, Tao (Zhao Tao), whose entire universe seems to begin and end at the complex. Along with her boyfriend, a security guard named Taisheng (Chen Taishen),  Tao yearns for a better life but can barely articulate much less envision what a life beyond this peculiarly conceived simulacrum might look like.  As he did with his last feature, "Unknown Pleasures," Mr. Jia has fashioned a quietly despairing vision of contemporary China with an almost ethnographic attention to detail and a somewhat cavalier attitude toward narrative momentum. The film opens with Tao tramping through the backstage corridors and warrenlike dressing rooms where she and the other young performers spend so much of their time. Dressed like a Las Vegas version of a Hindu princess and insistently, rather hilariously bellowing for a bandage, she makes for a gaudy and curiously poignant spectacle. By the time she finally finds her Band-Aid, the credits have rolled and the dressing rooms have emptied out of the other performers, leaving her to tend to the first of many such wounds.  Loosely constructed, "The World" drifts along pleasantly for much of its two-and-a-half-hour running time. Mr. Jia has a terrific eye and an almost sculptural sense of film space (especially in close quarters), and he brings texture and density to even the most nondescript rooms. And while he's too in love with the film's overarching metaphor, he nonetheless gracefully incorporates the theme park into the everyday lives of its workers. In one scene, we pass by a miniature Leaning Tower of Pisa with the nonchalance of an Italian citizen; in another scene, the pyramids of Egypt, complete with drifts of sand and a masticating camel, make a suitably dramatic backdrop to a fight between friends.  Something of a story gradually emerges, built on incident, mood and the amorphous desires of the film's characters. Tao befriends a Russian woman whose melancholic smile, crumpled family photograph and horribly bruised shoulders speak volumes about her plight. The scenes of the two women trying to communicate despite their language differences at times veer dangerously close to melodramatic excess, in particular when the Russian starts to drunkenly serenade Tao, but Mr. Jia manages, for the most part, to keep sentimentality at bay. In the end, what makes Tao herself a figure of great pathos isn't that she understands the other woman's tragedy; it's that because, locked inside this false world, Tao does not and, suggests Mr. Jia, cannot see her.  In a sense this miniaturized world creates a prison for the filmmaker, as well. Mr. Jia isn't just enamored with his metaphor; he's mesmerized by it. As he wanders around the amusement park, repeatedly cutting away to the phony Eiffel Tower jutting into the China sky, the pyramids and even the Manhattan skyline, he increasingly comes across less like a filmmaker who knows what he's after and more like a besotted tourist. Even when he occasionally takes us outside the park, for a glimpse of the whirring Beijing street life, with its teeming humanity and a shocking glimpse of Chairman Mao beatifically smiling over the city, you get the sense that Mr. Jia is, as much as any of the film's other caged birds, eager to return to his manufactured world. 

A natural progression from his earlier features that confirms him as one of the most interesting and insightful chroniclers of the new China, "The World" reflects the shifting of Jia Zhang-ke's attention from the changing face of small-town life to people from the provinces trying to make it in Beijing. Once again targeting the impact of urbanization and globalization on a traditionalist culture, the writer-director this time chooses a far tighter microcosm to expose a society frantically on the move while going nowhere. Jia's passionate critical following could help this absorbing tapestry segue from festival berths onto specialized distribution slates.
The director's fourth feature feels like the completion of a trilogy. Jia's intimately detailed 2000 epic "Platform" used a group of friends in a northern provincial town to gauge the first impact of Western influence, consumerism and new values on post-Cultural Revolution China through the 1980s.
He followed in 2002 with the digitally shot "Unknown Pleasures," which skipped ahead to the start of this decade, again examining Northerners, this time crippled by aimlessness and lack of prospects. While that drama played like a more shapeless, less rewarding revisitation of themes in "Platform," Jia's new film actively furthers his exploration of the consequences of growth and change in the name of so-called economic and cultural expansion.
Jia's highly effective metaphor for an artificially evolved society is World Park, a 115-acre theme park on the edge of Beijing that features reproductions of famous international landmarks, among them the Taj Mahal, Eiffel Tower, St. Peters Cathedral, the Pyramids and Leaning Tower of Pisa, all linked by a monorail.
The setting supplies considerable offbeat humor in the early going -- a staffer proudly points out that the park's Manhattan replica still has its Twin Towers -- as well as underlining the distinctly narrow experience of the outside world provided to visitors via a passenger plane that doesn't leave the ground.
Northern transplant Tao (Zhao Tao) moved to the city with her boyfriend Taisheng (Chen Taisheng). She works as a dancer in World Park's glitzy Vegas-style ethno-spectaculars, while Taisheng is a security guard there. Tao is crushed, however, when she finds out about Taisheng's relationship with Qun (Wang Yiqun), a married woman who makes European designer knockoffs.
Floating among interconnected secondary characters in a loose, Altmanesque style, the film looks at the boyfriend problems and career moves of Tao's fellow dancers. It also drops in on northern manual laborers working at the construction sites multiplying all over the city. In perhaps the most poignant strand, one such worker is killed in a building site accident. His death brings his rural parents to the city, where they appear like stunned, unworldly aliens.
The action is punctuated by cell phone text messages that spark animated interludes reflecting Tao's emotional state. Throughout the drama, a doleful sense emerges of people separated from their families in a lonely environment of tenuous connections.
Jia's regular muse Zhao is much more the center here than she was in his previous films, which were truer ensemble pieces. First seen in bejeweled Indian princess garb barking demands at her fellow cast members, the actress steadily and subtly exposes the needy, old-fashioned provincial girl beneath Tao's sassy behavior and cultivated veneer of sophistication. That gradual peeling back of layers is reflected in the film as a whole, which starts out light and curious but moves increasingly in a contemplative, melancholy direction.
Distinctly modern and un-Chinese in their shooting style, Jia and accomplished regular d.p. Yu Lik-wai use the camera to quietly creep up on the characters, observing them from detached vantage points. Visually, "The World" has an especially keen feel for movement, both human and vehicular, from the gorgeous dance sequences to airport crowds to the constant blur of cars and trains.
While the film feels overlong at two hours 20 minutes, there's a seductive stillness to its enveloping mood, with much to appreciate in the sureness of hand with which Jia allows his scenes the time to breathe. Echoing the drama's gentle, undulating rhythms is Lim Giong's silky-smooth electronic music that accompanies the World Park shows.
Camera (color), Yu Lik-wai; editor, Kong Jinglei; music, Lim Giong; art director, Wu Li-zhong; sound (Dolby Digital), Zhang Yang. Reviewed at Venice Film Festival (competing), Sept. 3, 2004. (In Toronto, New York film festivals.) Running time: 140 MIN.
 


After three unsanctioned productions steeped in regional detail—each one a masterpiece—Chinese filmmaker Jia Zhangke  goes at once aboveground and global. Set in the 35-year-old director's native province of Shanxi , Xiao Wu   (1997), Platform  (2000), and Unknown Pleasures  (2002) gravitate to the young and the powerless, stricken and paralyzed even as the world around them convulses at warp speed. The films outline the contours of the spiritual vacuum created by the double whammy of the Cultural Revolution and the Deng-era blind lunge toward free markets. They abound in ethnographic specifics but their hapless dreamers embody a universal sentiment: We've got to get out of this place.
The World  appears to grant that wish. "I'm going to India," announces Tao (Jia's regular star Zhao Tao) early on—and the scenic route even affords a view of the Pyramids and the Sphinx. Welcome to Beijing  World Park, a themed expanse in the suburbs that features scale replicas of some 100 tourist attractions from five continents. With mock-infomercial solemnity, The World  flashes the park's slogan on the screen: "See the world without ever leaving Beijing." Anyone who has seen a Jia film will realize this is less a promise than a threat.
Jia's fourth feature has been greeted as his statement on globalization—but which of his movies isn't? The director, whose formative years coincided with an influx of previously banned artworks, has a complex take on how globalization affects the kid on the street— particularly in terms of imported popular culture and technology. Jia's characters embrace karaoke and break dancing, consume Taiwanese pop and bootleg DVDs, cling to favorite songs like life-saving talismans. But even more than the Shanxi trilogy, The World  emphasizes that the illusion of interconnectedness does not equal (or even enable) the experience of mobility. The movie demolishes the go-go globalizer's obnoxious equation of free trade with freedom. The World may be flat; the world is decidedly not.
Befitting Jia's first authorized production, the movie is a lavish exercise in pageantry—though only the most myopic World Park official could mistake this for a positive representation. (Jia's version of the site fluidly combines Beijing's real, 12-year-old one and the similar Window of the World in Hong Kong–adjacent Shenzhen .) No less than Westworld, Jia's theme park offers no way out—a hermetic zone of zombified ritual and Muzak Beethoven , encircled by a snaking monorail and eerily deserted highways. Big Ben abuts Lower Manhattan and the still-standing World Trade Center ; the Eiffel Tower  looms over the Taj Mahal . The sense of the ersatz is seamless, even if the counterfeits aren't convincing. In Jia's formulation, the World Park—with its furious proliferation of imitations and visceral absence of context—is alienating in much the same way as modern-day China.
Tao, a member of the World Park performing troupe, and her boyfriend, Taisheng (Chen Taisheng ), a security guard, are Shanxi transplants, and The World  makes painfully clear the finite options available to provincials flooding into Chinese cities. Tao and Taisheng are trapped in a taunting virtual environment, but they're lucky compared to his peasant friends, who are consigned to hazardous construction work. Illegal or otherwise unsavory activity seems the quickest shortcut to advancement. Like the title character in Xiao Wu , Tao is dimly aware of what it would take to better her lot, but can't bring herself to carry out the soul-crushing transactions.
Instead, she harbors wistful fantasies of flight—most poignantly, in a sequence that envisions a plastic rain sheet as an enchanted cape. They may traverse "continents," but Tao and her fellow employees are effectively grounded—the Russian guest workers are required to surrender their passports. (One unforgettable image, a plane taking off over a field of concrete columns, stresses just how earthbound these people are.) Tao dresses up in garishly exotic saris and kimonos for nightly stage spectacles, but song and dance, traditionally an escape hatch for Jia's characters, loses its magic when all of life is a show.
Just as a ringing pager brings about Xiao Wu's final humiliation, an ill-timed text message precipitates The Worl  d 's lurch toward tragic melodrama. On a first viewing, the movie seemed a dilution of the formal strategies Jia had perfected—at once less dispassionate and less empathetic. After a repeat viewing, it still strikes me as Jia's fourth-best film (that it's one of the year's best says plenty about the level at which he's working), but it's more apparent that The Worl  d 's muffled emotional impact should be understood as a function of its setting. Tao and Taisheng are typical Jia lovers, playing romance as a desultory game of defense, but the oppressive backdrop diminishes their squabbles and infects their inner lives with a deadening blankness.
With its ready-made metaphors, precise and quietly flashy long-take cinematography (by the estimable Yu Lik-wai), a seductively trancey score by Lim Giong  (the first use of non-diegetic music in the Jia oeuvre), and flurries of whimsical animated punctuation, The World  is the director's most accessible film. But it's also his most despairing—a harsh riposte to the first three. Jia's characters are forever looking to escape their isolation (a key location in Unknown Pleasures  is the half-built highway that will link the depressed mining town of Datong  to Beijing). The cruel revelation here is that what awaits out in the world is nothing better—or more real—than what's in The World .
